Technical Data Sheet
LOCTITE LIOFOL LA 7796 / LA 6154
May-2017
PRODUCT DESCRIPTION
LOCTITE LIOFOL LA 7796 / LA 6154 has the following
product characteristics:
Technology Polyurethane
Product Type Laminating adhesive
Condition Solvent-free
Components Two components - requires mixing
Application Manufacture of flexible laminates
Performance Medium-High
Cure After mixing - curing at room
temperature [RT]
Mix ratio
Base : Hardener
Parts by weight
100 : 50
Application area:
LOCTITE LIOFOL LA 7796 / LA 6154 is suitable for a wide
range of transparent, metalized plastic film and foil
laminates.
Suitable substrates:
● Polyester (PET)
● Metallized Polyester (PET)
● Polyethylene (PE)
● Slip film
● High slip film
● White pigmented Polyethylene (PE) film
● White pigmented Polyethylene (PE) EVA film (up to 9%
vinyl acetate)
● EVA copolymer film
● Polypropylene (CPP, OPP)
● Metallized Polypropylene (CPP, OPP) film
● Polyamide (CPA, OPA)
● Aluminium foil
● Polyester (PET) with AIOx-coating
● Polyester (PET) with SiOx-coating
Films may be plain or printed. All films must have a surface
tension of at least 38 mN/m (= dyn/cm). The use of an inline
corona station can improve the anchorage of the adhesive to
uncoated films.
Laminates made from suitable films can be subjected to
the following processes:
● Pasteurisation (30 min at 90 °C) of plastic film laminates
● Pasteurisation (30 min at 90 °C) of foil containing
laminates
● Boiling of plastic film laminates
● Boiling of foil containing laminates
● Deep draw of plastic film laminates
● Aggressive filling goods in plastic film laminates
● Aggressive filling goods in foil containing laminates
● Hot-filling
● Dry filling goods
● Liquid filling goods
● Microwavable packs (without receptor)
Product properties:
LOCTITE LIOFOL LA 7796 / LA 6154 offers the following
properties:
● excellent machine runability
● excellent substrate wetting
● very long pot life
● good protection from anti seal effects when using high
slip PE, CPA, EVA or white pigmented PE films
● high thermal resistance plastic film laminates
● high thermal resistance in foil containing laminates
● excellent chemical resistance against aggressive filling
goods in plastic film laminates
● excellent chemical resistance against aggressive filling
goods in foil containing laminates
● fast PAA decay even in problematic laminates
● suitable for very high machine speeds
● fast bond strength increase and further processing
● The cured adhesive film is transparent, odorless, elastic
and resistant to ageing

-- 1 of 3 --

TDS LOCTITE LIOFOL LA 7796 / Hardener LA 6154, May-2017
TECHNICAL DATA
LOCTITE LIOFOL LA 7796
Component NCO component
Solvent none
Appearance (500 mL glass) clear to turbid, yellow
Solid content, % 100
Viscosity at 40 °C, mPas 600 to 1,500
Density at 20 °C, g/cm³ 1.2
Hardener LA 6154
Component OH component
Solvent none
Appearance (500 mL glass) clear to turbid, colourless
to yellow
Solid content, % 100
Viscosity at 20 °C, mPas 300 to 1,300
Density at 20 °C, g/cm³ 1.1
Ready-to-Use Mixture
Viscosity at 40 °C, mPas ~900
Increase of Viscosity
after 15 minutes, mPas ~2,000
after 30 minutes, mPas ~4,000
after 60 minutes, mPas ~11,000
Running solids, % 100
Typical Temperature/Viscosity Profile
Viscosity, mPa·s
Minutes
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
0 15 30 45 60
Compliance with food packaging regulations:
Under specific conditions LOCTITE LIOFOL LA 7796 / LA
6154 is suitable for the manufacture of food packaging
materials under the applicable FDA, EU-provisions and/or
BfR recommendations. A food contact statement with further
details is available on request. The responsibility for
compliance with the specific conditions lies with the
converter and not with the adhesive supplier.
LOCTITE LIOFOL LA 7796 / LA 6154 contains aromatic
isocyanates. Migration testing under conditions of use is
required, particularly with high temperature applications, to
demonstrate compliance with the limits of primary aromatic
amines.
DIRECTIONS OF USE
Preliminary statement:
Prior to application it is necessary to read the Safety Data
Sheet for information about precautionary measures and
safety recommendations. Please also refer to the local
country-specific safety regulations pertaining to dangerous
goods.
LOCTITE LIOFOL LA 7796 / LA 6154 contains isocyanates.
To avoid the emission of volatile isocyanates into the working
area, the coating unit has to be equipped with an extraction
hood. Avoid skin contact. Local country-specific safety
regulations with regard to handling of isocyanates have to be
followed.
Dosing:
The adhesive is continuously added in the gap of the
application station with a two-component dosing and mixing
unit. The amount of adhesive in the gap should be kept at the
lowest possible level. Use a static mixer which provides
effective mixing. At the outlet of the dosing and mixing
equipment, the adhesive has to be clear and homogeneous,
not milky. A new static mixer has to be used after a longer
dosing stop.
Working life:
Ready to use adhesive that has not been consumed after the
time stated has to be discarded. In tropical conditions, i.e.
high ambient temperatures and/or high humidity the working
life of the mixed adhesive is shorter.
Application:
LOCTITE LIOFOL LA 7796 / LA 6154 can be applied
on laminating machines with multi-roller application system.
Application weight:
Depending on the film combination and intended application
of the laminate, the following coat weights (dry) are
recommended.
Typical application weight, g/m²: 1 to 3
For printed laminates the application weight has to be
adjusted depending on print coverage.
Processing temperature:
For optimal processing, adjustment of the processing
temperature is necessary. In order to achieve the best
possible flow and good wetting, we recommend to the
following processing temperatures:
Dosing unit - LOCTITE LIOFOL LA 7796, °C: 30 to 45
Dosing unit - LOCTITE LIOFOL LA 6154, °C: 20 to 40
Tubes, °C: 30 to 45
Gap, °C: 35 to 45
Application Station - application roller, °C:
(dependent on line speed)
45 to 60
Nip roller, °C: 20 to 60
Working conditions:
Precise web tension control together with a suitable winding
program help to avoid tunneling as well as telescoping and
curling effects. High laminating temperature (suitable for the
substrates in use) together with a high line pressure of the

-- 2 of 3 --

TDS LOCTITE LIOFOL LA 7796 / Hardener LA 6154, May-2017
calander improve the bond strength and optical appearance
of the laminate.
Curing:
Depending on laminate structure and end use, laminates
may be subjected to further processing after the typical cure
time mentioned below.
Triplex lamination after duplex lamination: 4 to 8 hours
Slitting / rewinding: 24 hours
Final performance: 3 to 5 days
The curing temperature should not fall below 18 °C, since the
chemical crosslinking reaction may be delayed or stopped.
When manufacturing laminates for food and pharmaceutical
applications, in addition to mechanical hardening, the time
required to reach the applicable migration limits has to be
taken into account. For further details, please consult the
food contact statement.
Cleaning:
Application station and machine parts should be cleaned
immediately after production with a suitable solvent such as
ethyl acetate or methylethylketone (MEK). Cured adhesive
can be removed with LOCTITE LIOFOL CL ECOPOWER.
During machine stops, LOCTITE LIOFOL CL ECOPOWER
can help to prevent the hardening of the adhesive and
thereby increases the lifetime of rubber rollers. Technical
data sheets for these products are available upon request.
When cleaning, observe the applicable safety regulations
and the manufacturer's instructions.
STORAGE
Please refer to the Material Safety Data Sheet and the
applicable local legislation for safe storage. Opened
containers of LOCTITE LIOFOL LA 7796 or LA 6154 have to
be reclosed tightly immediately after use and consumed
within a short time span. When stored in a dry and cool place
outside of direct sunlight in original unopened containers, the
shelf life is as follows.
Shelf Life:
LOCTITE LIOFOL LA 7796, months: 9
LOCTITE LIOFOL LA 6154, months: 9
Recommended storage temperature, °C -20 to 50
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Performance testing:
Before going into full scale production, practical testing is
necessary, as substrates, additives, printing inks, filling
goods and the final application can influence the quality and
final performance of a laminate significantly.
Disclaimer
Note:
The information provided in this Technical Data Sheet (TDS) including the
recommendations for use and application of the product are based on our
knowledge and experience of the product as at the date of this TDS. The
product can have a variety of different applications as well as differing
application and working conditions in your environment that are beyond our
control. Henkel is, therefore, not liable for the suitability of our product for the
production processes and conditions in respect of which you use them, as
well as the intended applications and results. We strongly recommend that
you carry out your own prior trials to confirm such suitability of our product.
Any liability in respect of the information in the Technical Data Sheet or any
other written or oral recommendation(s) regarding the concerned product is
excluded, except if otherwise explicitly agreed and except in relation to death
or personal injury caused by our negligence and any liability under any
applicable mandatory product liability law.
In case products are delivered by Henkel Belgium NV, Henkel Electronic
Materials NV, Henkel Nederland BV, Henkel Technologies France SAS
and Henkel France SA please additionally note the following:
In case Henkel would be nevertheless held liable, on whatever legal ground,
Henkel’s liability will in no event exceed the amount of the concerned
delivery.
In case products are delivered by Henkel Colombiana, S.A.S. the
following disclaimer is applicable:
The information provided in this Technical Data Sheet (TDS) including the
recommendations for use and application of the product are based on our
knowledge and experience of the product as at the date of this TDS. Henkel
is, therefore, not liable for the suitability of our product for the production
processes and conditions in respect of which you use them, as well as the
intended applications and results. We strongly recommend that you carry out
your own prior trials to confirm such suitability of our product.
Any liability in respect of the information in the Technical Data Sheet or any
other written or oral recommendation(s) regarding the concerned product is
excluded, except if otherwise explicitly agreed and except in relation to death
or personal injury caused by our negligence and any liability under any
applicable mandatory product liability law.
In case products are delivered by Henkel Corporation, Resin
Technology Group, Inc., or Henkel Canada Corporation, the following
disclaimer is applicable:
The data contained herein are furnished for information only and are believed
to be reliable. We cannot assume responsibility for the results obtained by
others over whose methods we have no control. It is the user's responsibility
to determine suitability for the user's purpose of any production methods
mentioned herein and to adopt such precautions as may be advisable for the
protection of property and of persons against any hazards that may be
involved in the handling and use thereof. In light of the foregoing, Henkel
Corporation specifically disclaims all warranties expressed or implied,
including warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular
purpose, arising from sale or use of Henkel Corporation’s products.
Henkel Corporation specifically disclaims any liability for consequential
or incidental damages of any kind, including lost profits. The discussion
herein of various processes or compositions is not to be interpreted as
representation that they are free from domination of patents owned by others
or as a license under any Henkel Corporation patents that may cover such
processes or compositions. We recommend that each prospective user test
his proposed application before repetitive use, using this data as a guide.
This product may be covered by one or more United States or foreign patents
or patent applications.
Trademark usage: [Except as otherwise noted] All trademarks in this
document are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of Henkel and its
affiliates in the U.S. and elsewhere.
Reference 0.0
Henkel AG & Co. KGaA Henkel Corporation Henkel Diadema Henkel (China) Co.Ltd. Henkel Jebel Ali FZCO
40191 Düsseldorf, Germany Cary, NC 27511, USA Diadema - SP, Brasil 201203 Shanghai, China Dubai, UAE
Phone: +49-211-797-0 Phone: +1-919-319-1933 Phone: +55-11-3205-8955 Phone: +86-21-2891-8000 Phone: +971-4-3893333
For more information contact us on www.henkel.com

-- 3 of 3 --

