

===== PAGE 1 =====
 


===== PAGE 2 =====
 
    Customer Relationship Management 

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
   VSF 
   This book is dedicated to my children Emma and Lewis of whom I am 
enormously proud. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
   Customer 
Relationship
Management
   Concepts and Technologies 
Second edition
   Francis Buttle 
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON • NEW YORK • OXFORD 
PARIS • SAN DIEGO • SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Butterworth-Heinemann is an imprint of Elsevier

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
Butterworth-Heinemann is an imprint of Elsevier
Linacre House, Jordan Hill, Oxford OX2 8DP
30 Corporate Drive, Suite 400, Burlington, MA 01803, USA
First edition 2009
Copyright © 2009, Francis Buttle
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
The right of Francis Buttle to be identiﬁ ed as the author of this work has been 
asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science & Technology Rights 
Department in Oxford, UK: phone (/H1100144) (0) 1865 843830; fax: (/H1100144) (0) 1865 
853333; email: permissions@elsevier.com. Alternatively you can submit your 
request online by visiting the Elsevier web site at http://elsevier.com/locate/
permissions, and selecting Obtaining permission to use Elsevier material.
Notice
No responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to 
persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, 
or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions or ideas 
contained in the material herein. Because of rapid advances in the medical 
sciences, in particular, independent veriﬁ cation of diagnoses and drug dosages 
should be made.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
ISBN: 978-1-85617-522-7
 For information on all Butterworth-Heinemann publications 
visit our web site at  www.elsevierdirect.com  
Typeset by Charon Tec Ltd., A Macmillan Company.
(www.macmillansolutions.com).
Printed and bound in Hungary
09 10 11 12 13  10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1


===== PAGE 6 =====
 
   Contents 
   Foreword  xi
   Preface  xiii
   Acknowledgements xvii
   About the author  xxi
1 Introduction to customer relationship management 1
    Chapter objectives 3
    Introduction 3
    Strategic CRM 4
    Operational CRM 6
  Analytical CRM 9
    Collaborative CRM 11 
    Misunderstandings about CRM 12
    D e ﬁ ning CRM 14
    CRM constituencies 16
    Commercial contexts of CRM 17
    The not-for-proﬁ t context 18
    Models of CRM 18
    Summary 22
    References 22
2 Understanding relationships  25 
    Chapter objectives 27
    What is a relationship? 27
    Relationship quality 30
    Why companies want relationships with customers 31
    Why companies do NOT want relationships with customers 40 
    Why customers want relationships with suppliers 41
    Why customers do NOT want relationships with suppliers 42 
    Customer satisfaction, loyalty and business performance 43 
    Researching the satisfaction–proﬁ  t chain 46
    Relationship management theories 50
    Summary 55
    References 55
3  Planning and implementing customer relationship  
management projects 61
    Chapter objectives 63
    Introduction 63

===== PAGE 7 =====
 
    CRM implementation 63
    Phase 1: Develop the CRM strategy 65
    Phase 2: Build CRM project foundations 72
    Phase 3: Needs speciﬁ cation and partner selection 80
    Phase 4: Project implementation 89
    Phase 5: Evaluate performance 90
    Summary 91
    References 91
4 Developing, managing and using customer-related databases 93
    Chapter objectives 95
    Introduction 95
    What is a customer-related database? 95
    Developing a customer-related database 96
     Select the database technology and hardware platform 102
Maintain the database 107
    Desirable data attributes 108
    Data integration 109
    Data warehousing 111 
    Data marts 112 
    Data access and interrogation 113 
    Data mining 114 
    Privacy issues 117 
    Summary 120
    References 120
5 Customer portfolio management 123
    Chapter objectives 125
    What is a portfolio? 125
    Who is the customer? 126
    Basic disciplines for CPM  127
    Market segmentation 127
    Sales forecasting 136
  Activity-based costing 138
    Lifetime value estimation 141
    Data mining 143
    CPM in the business-to-business context 147
  Additional customer portfolio management tools 154
    Strategically signiﬁ cant customers 157
    The seven core customer management strategies 158
    Summary 160
    References 160
6 Customer relationship management and customer 
 experience 163
    Chapter objectives 165
    Introduction  165
    What is meant by customer experience?  165
    Experiential marketing strategies and tactics  174
    Customer experience and the role of CRM  178
vi Contents

===== PAGE 8 =====
 
     Features of CRM software applications that inﬂ uence  
customer experience  179
    Researching the link between customer experience and CRM  182
    Summary  183
    References  183
7 Creating value for customers 185
    Chapter objectives  187
    Introduction  187
    Understanding value  187
    Sources of customer value  191
    Customization  193
    Value from products  197
    Value from service  201
    Value from processes  210
    Value from people  213
    Value from physical evidence  214
    Value from customer communication  216
    Value from channels  218
    Summary  219
    References  220
8 Managing the customer lifecycle: customer acquisition 225
    Chapter objectives  227
    Introduction  227
    What is a new customer?  228
    Customer value estimates  231
    Prospecting  233
    Key performance indicators of customer acquisition programmes  248
    Making the right offer  249
    Operational CRM tools that help customer acquisition  250
    Support from CRM analytics  252
    Summary  253
    References  253
9  Managing the customer lifecycle: customer retention  
and development 255
    Chapter objectives  257
    Introduction  257
    What is customer retention?  258
    Manage customer retention or value retention?  260
    Economics of customer retention  261
    Which customers to retain?  262
    Strategies for customer retention  263
    Positive customer retention strategies  263
    Learning from research into customer commitment  277
    Context makes a difference  280
    Key performance indicators of customer retention programmes  281
    The role of research  282
    Strategies for customer development  283
Contents vii

===== PAGE 9 =====
 
    Strategies for terminating customer relationships  284
    Summary  287
    References  287
10  Managing networks for customer relationship  
management performance 291
    Chapter objectives  293
    Introduction  293
    What is a network?  294
    Business networks  295
    Network position  296
    What is meant by  ‘ focal ﬁ rm? ’   298
    Business networks and CRM  298
    The SCOPE of CRM  299
    Supplier networks  300
    Distribution networks  301
    Principles of network management  303
    Management of networks  303
    Management in networks  306
    Research into network competence  307
    Summary  307
    References  308
11 Managing supplier and partner relationships 311
    Chapter objectives  313
    Introduction  313
    Supplier relationships  314
    Product development  315
    Supplier accreditation programmes 315
    Process alignment  317
    Trends in supplier relationship management  320
    Product development alliances  323
    Electronic procurement  324
    Partners  327
    Partners in value creation  327
  Alliances between non-competing ﬁ rms  329
  Alliances between competing ﬁ rms  330
    Category teams  331
    Benchmarking partners  331
    Regulators  333
    Customer advocacy groups  333
    Sponsors  335
    Partners in value delivery  336
    Summary  340
    References  340
12 Managing investor and employee relationships 343
    Chapter objectives  345
    Introduction  345
    Owner/investor relationships  345
viii Contents

===== PAGE 10 =====
 
    Educate current investors  349
    Investor relations portals  351
    Employees  351
    Internal marketing  353
    Empowerment  354
    The service–proﬁ  t chain  355
    Employee relationship management (ERM) software  
 applications  357
    Summary  359
    References  360
13 Information technology for customer relationship  
 management 363
    Chapter objectives  365
    Introduction  365
    Origins of CRM technology  365
    The CRM ecosystem  369
    CRM solutions  372
    CRM analytics  377
    CRM architecture  381
    Multichannel CRM  381
    Mobile and wireless solutions  383
    Integration  385
    Knowledge management  389
  Automated workﬂ ow  390
    Summary  391
    References  392
14 Sales-force automation 393
    Chapter objectives  395
    Introduction  395
    What is SFA?  396
    The SFA ecosystem  396
    SFA software functionality  398
    SFA adoption  406
    How SFA changes sales performance  408
    Summary  409
    References  410
15 Marketing automation 413
    Chapter objectives  415
    Introduction  415
    What is marketing automation?  415
    Beneﬁ  ts of marketing automation  416
    Software applications for marketing  417
    Summary  439
    References  440
16 Service automation 443
    Chapter objectives  445
    Introduction  445
Contents ix

===== PAGE 11 =====
 
    What is customer service?  445
    What is service automation? 447
    Beneﬁ  ts from service automation  449
    Software applications for service  450
    Summary  461
    References  461
17  Organizational issues and customer relationship  
management 463
    Chapter objectives  465
    Introduction  465
    Organizational roles and CRM  465
    Strategic goals of CRM  469
    Conventional customer management structures  469
    Network and virtual organizations  474
    Person-to-person contacts  475
    Key account management  476
    Team selling  481
    Summary  482
    References 483
Index 485 
x Contents

===== PAGE 12 =====
 
Foreword
Customer relationship management’s impact in the commercial 
marketplace cannot be undervalued. Despite traditional economic theory 
on market entry and pricing prescribing that enterprises should engage 
customers through prefabricated reactions and interactions given the 
customer event taking place, the nature, impact and reach of the power 
of enriching customer experiences has emerged in 2008.
Yet, one of the most common mistakes made by global companies is to 
view CRM as solely a technology or business challenge. CRM is ﬁ rst and 
foremost a business strategy that can be effectively executed through the 
appropriate business process and technology management capabilities 
that best match to an organization’s customer-facing goals.
Long gone are the views of CRM being applications or business 
process methodologies for engaging customers in contact centers in the 
customer service functional domains within an organization. Today, 
every interaction or ‘moment of truth’ with customers can help sustain, 
direct, implore or resuscitate desired outcomes by enterprises. These 
processes transcend functional departmental silos and extend their reach 
across the process network to include sales and distribution partners and 
channels. Technology, process and organizational architectures together 
in concert will determine the effectiveness of how these end-to-end 
business processes will align to customer intents and enrich their overall 
experience with an organization.
The CRM strategic paradigm has gone through a three-phase 
generational shift over the last decade (1998–2008) with enterprises 
maturing from: 1) Marketing to customers the best products at the best 
prices, to 2) Marketing customers with the best services, to 3) Marketing 
customers with the dynamic services and products that they want and 
desire as measured by customer intent. Today, with the advent and 
proliferation of social communities across the internet world customers 
have channels for information-sharing on an enterprise’s services and 
products that is extremely powerful. This emergence has disrupted 
conventional approaches towards managing customer or product 
information. Paradoxically, customers no longer look towards an enterprise 
as the best source of data or information about their own commercial 
product or service offerings. This sense of brand promise and brand trust 
has deteriorated, and today customers place their conﬁ dence in the shared 
and communal experiences of others through social community networks 
which provide transparency on valued customer experiences in the 
marketplace. In fact, as this book is being printed a great number of CRM 
Application vendors in the marketplace are vying to provide technology 
solutions for enterprises to integrate and use these social networks as part 
of core enterprise ERP and CRM solutions.

===== PAGE 13 =====
 
It is with distinct pleasure that I introduce you to Francis Buttle’s 
comprehensive work on CRM. His passion for and grasp of the concepts, 
disruptors and application of CRM approaches will accelerate readers’ 
abilities to grasp these exciting topics.
When considering CRM, there is no strategic alternative for enterprises 
but a relentless approach towards driving customer centricity in order to 
achieve current, future and lifetime proﬁ  tability by creating customers 
for life.
Isher Kaila
Research Director, Global CRM Stratety
Gartner Inc.
San Jose, CA
USA
xii Foreword

===== PAGE 14 =====
 
   Preface 
Welcome to the second edition of Customer Relationship Management: 
Concepts and Technologies.
The book provides a comprehensive and balanced review of Customer 
Relationship Management. It explains what CRM is, the beneﬁ  ts it 
delivers, the contexts in which it is used, the technologies that are 
deployed, and how it can be implemented. It shows how CRM practices 
and technologies are used to enhance the achievement of marketing, 
sales and service objectives throughout the customer life-cycle stages of 
customer acquisition, retention and development, whilst simultaneously 
supporting broader organizational goals.
The book has been written to meet the demand for an impartial, 
academically-sound, examination of CRM. It is a learning resource both 
for students of CRM and for managers wanting a better appreciation of 
the role that CRM can play in their own organizations.
The ﬁ rst edition was entitled Customer Relationship Management: 
Concepts and Tools. The change to the new subtitle, Concepts and 
Technologies, reﬂ  ects the requirements of readers. In true customer-
oriented manner, we surveyed readers and adopters of the ﬁ  rst edition. 
They said they wanted more on CRM technologies. This book delivers 
it. However, although there are a number of chapters dedicated to CRM 
technologies, and technology matters are considered throughout the book, 
the book puts technology into a managerial context. This is not a book 
about technologies, but it is about how marketers, salespeople, service 
staff and their managers can use technologies to better understand and 
meet the requirements of customers, whilst also meeting organizational 
goals and objectives. Our survey of readers and adopters also discovered 
that they wanted more case illustrations and screenshots from CRM 
software applications. The book delivers them, too.
The book draws on academic and independent research to ensure 
that it is both theoretically sound and managerially relevant. Research 
from a wide range of academic disciplines contributes to the book. 
These include marketing, sales, customer service, human resources, 

===== PAGE 15 =====
 
technology management, strategy, change management, project 
management, leadership, operations, management accounting, ﬁ  nance 
and organizational behaviour. Supplementing these academic credentials, 
the book also makes use of research conducted by independent analysts 
such as Gartner and Forrester, two organizations that conduct leading-
edge, state-of-the-art research into CRM and related areas.
    Audience for the book 
   This book has been written for a number of audiences, all of whom share 
an interest in improving their understanding of CRM. 
●      MBA and Masters students, and upper-level undergraduates studying 
CRM or related advanced courses, such as relationship marketing, 
database marketing, customer management, sales management, 
key account management, strategic management, customer value 
management and customer service management.  
●      Those pursuing professional qualiﬁ  cations or accreditation in 
marketing through international organizations, such as the Chartered 
Institute of Marketing and the Institute of Direct Marketing, or national 
bodies such as the Marketing Institute of Ireland or the Canadian 
Institute of Marketing. 
●      Senior and mid-level managers who are involved in CRM programmes 
and system implementations, whether in a marketing department, the 
sales-force or the service centre. 
●      Students pursuing professional qualiﬁ cations or accreditation in sales 
management or key account management through international 
organizations such as the Institute of Sales and Marketing Management 
or the Association of International Marketing. 
●      CRM users who want a better understanding of this complex area. CRM 
tools are deployed across the customer-facing parts of organizations. 
Users includes sales representatives, account managers, marketing 
managers, market analysts, campaign managers, market managers, 
customer relationship managers and customer service managers. These 
users are exposed to just a fragment of the CRM universe. This book 
can put their role into broader context. 
    Key features of the book 
         ●      The book provides a helicopter view, an overview, of the domain of 
CRM. As an impartial review of the ﬁ eld, it is not tied to any particular 
perspective on CRM. Indeed, the book identiﬁ  es a number of holistic 
models that provide different and competing overviews of CRM. 
●      Although CRM is in widespread use, there is still some misunder-
standing about what CRM is. The book identiﬁ  es four different 
types of CRM: strategic, operational, analytical and collaborative. 
xiv Preface

===== PAGE 16 =====
 
Several chapters are dedicated to strategic CRM and others focus on 
operational CRM, whereas analytical CRM and collaborative CRM 
issues are addressed throughout the book.  
●      The book deﬁ nes CRM as the core business strategy that integrates 
internal processes and functions, and external networks, to create 
and deliver value to targeted customers at a proﬁ  t. CRM is grounded 
on high quality customer-related data and enabled by information 
technology. This deﬁ  nition serves as a central point-of-reference 
throughout the book.  
●      The book emphasizes a managerial perspective on CRM. Although 
there is plenty of content on technology, it is not a book about 
technology per se . The technology content of the book has been 
written so that readers who are unfamiliar with technology, or who 
are technophobes, can still understand what CRM technologies can 
deliver. Technology is secondary to management throughout the 
book. You don’t need a degree in information systems to beneﬁ t from 
the book!  
●      The book has a strong academic foundation provided by research 
from a number of disciplines.  
●      The book contains many examples of CRM technologies and their 
application to marketing, selling or service functions. Screenshots are 
a feature of the book.  
●      Every chapter contains case illustrations. These are not problem-based 
cases, but examples of CRM in practice so that readers can come to 
appreciate how CRM is deployed.  
●      All chapters follow a common format: learning objectives, text, case 
illustrations, summary and references. 
    Improvements over the 
ﬁ rst edition 
   There are a number of important improvements to this edition which 
have been made largely as a result of input from readers and adopters. 
   The book is signiﬁ  cantly expanded. At seventeen chapters, this 
edition is seven chapters longer than the ﬁ  rst edition. There are three 
new chapters dedicated to operational CRM applications: sales-force 
automation, marketing automation and service automation. The chapters 
deﬁ ne important terms, identify the main vendors and actors, and set 
out the beneﬁ  ts users can expect to experience and the functionality 
that is available. There is a new chapter entitled  ‘ Understanding 
relationships ’ . If CRM is about developing and maintaining relationships 
with customers, it is important to have clear understanding of what 
a relationship looks like, and how, if at all, it can be managed. This 
chapter deﬁ nes the term  ‘ relationship ’ , examines whether customers 
want relationships with suppliers and vice versa, identiﬁ es attributes of 
successful relationships and reviews ﬁ  ve different schools of thought 
that have inﬂ  uenced relationship management in a business context. 
Preface xv

===== PAGE 17 =====
 
There is a new chapter on planning and implementing CRM projects. 
This takes readers through a disciplined ﬁ  ve-stage process designed to 
promote successful CRM outcomes. There is a new chapter on  ‘ Customer 
experience ’ . Customer experience has become something of a buzzword 
in the last few years. This chapter explores the concept of customer 
experience, and addresses the question of whether CRM can or does 
enhance customer experience. 
   Many new case illustrations have been added to every chapter, and 
all other content has been revised and updated. An added feature of 
this edition is the inclusion of a large number screenshots from CRM 
software applications. This is designed to give readers a sense of the 
CRM user’s experience. 
  A  ﬁ nal enhancement to this edition is the provision of an array of 
enriching online content, which is described below.  
    Additional online resources 
   Readers and adopters of the ﬁ rst edition said they wanted additional 
online resources to be available. There are now two websites linked to 
the book, designed to enrich the learning experience. 
   The website for  adopters  provides a range of pedagogical resources 
for instructors. Accessed by password and only available to authorized 
instructors, the site contains a full set of PowerPoint ﬁ  les; details of case 
studies that can be used as a basis for classroom discussion or student 
assignments; links to technology companies ’  websites where CRM 
technologies are demonstrated, and white papers and case histories 
can be viewed; links on online CRM communities and links to analysts 
websites where up-to-date CRM-related research is published. The 
adopters ’  website also includes a list of discussion topics, exercises, 
projects and assignments that engage students and promote deeper, 
more meaningful, learning. 
   The website for  readers  provides access to a range of value-adding 
content including chapter-by-chapter learning objectives; links 
to technology companies ’  websites where CRM technologies are 
demonstrated, and white papers and case histories can be viewed; links 
to online CRM communities; and links to analysts websites where up-to- 
date CRM-related research is published. 
   I hope you enjoy the book and ﬁ nd it a satisfying read. Writing a book 
is a little like painting a picture, or tending a garden. You never reach a 
point where you can safely say that the job is ﬁ  nished. There is always 
more that you can do. With that in mind, I invite you to write to me at 
francis@buttleassociates.com. I look forward to hearing from you. 
   Francis Buttle 
   Sydney
xvi Preface

===== PAGE 18 =====
 
   Acknowledgements 
   I’d like to express my appreciation to the many people and organizations 
that have contributed to this book. Most of these contributions have 
been requested and conscientiously delivered, but other contributors are 
unaware that their occasional comment or question is reﬂ  ected in these 
pages. I thank you all. 
I would particularly like to acknowledge the contribution of Isher Kaila 
who wrote the book’s Foreword. Isher is Research Director, Global CRM 
Strategy for Gartner Inc., San Jose, California, USA. Gartner is the world’s 
leading information technology research and advisory company. I ﬁ rst met 
Isher on one of his many global tours. He was visiting Australia where 
I had the opportunity to hear him speak insightfully and informatively 
about trends in CRM and customer experience management. Gartner 
claims ‘We deliver the technology-related insight necessary for our clients 
to make the right decisions, every day’. Isher certainly did on that day, 
and he makes some similarly shrewd observations in his Foreword.
   I would also like to acknowledge the input of John Turnbull and 
Matthew Holden. I have a strong managerial and strategic emphasis on 
CRM, which privileges the perspective of the user. In my 15 years or so 
of teaching, researching, advising and consulting on CRM I have learned 
much about technology, but am I by no means a match for these two 
technology experts. 
  John Turnbull is the founder and Managing Director of Customer 
Connect Australia ( www.customerconnect.com.au ). John began his 
working life with operational and management roles in service, sales, 
marketing support and project management. He has managed business 
transition programmes for a wide range of organizations across 
marketing, sales, service and operations. His experience also includes 
managing the sales consulting organizations in Australia and New 
Zealand for two major CRM vendors, PeopleSoft and Siebel (now Oracle). 
At Customer Connect Australia, John has helped organizations in a wide 
range of industries to succeed with their customer-centricity/customer 
management programmes. His work includes business consulting, CRM 

===== PAGE 19 =====
 
xviii Acknowledgements
strategy, customer management education, managing business transition 
and customer management (CMAT™) assessment. John contributed a 
chapter to the ﬁ rst edition of this book, and the current Chapter 13, IT for 
CRM, draws heavily on that foundation. John and I have worked together 
on a number of CRM educational projects. 
  Matthew Holden is a highly experienced IT executive who has held 
senior positions at both Oracle and SAP . Currently based in Singapore, 
he has been a lead CRM implementation consultant at various companies 
including Fosters Ltd, AAPT and Cellarmaster Wines. He now works 
with large Asian companies and governments across the entire 
information technology software spectrum from ERP to CRM. More 
information is available at www.matthewholden.com.au . I ﬁ  rst met 
Matthew when he enrolled as a PhD candidate and I had the pleasure of 
assisting him on the doctoral pathway. We have since worked together on 
a number of CRM educational projects. John and Matthew both read and 
commented on the technology-heavy chapters of this book. Thank you 
both for your input. 
  A number of doctoral candidates that I have supervised or advised 
have contributed signiﬁ cantly to the book. Special mention must go to 
Daniel Prior who identiﬁ ed and reviewed a number of different schools 
of relationship management. His thoughtful analysis provides a strong 
foundation for the discussion in Chapter 2. A number of chapters 
were read and critiqued by doctoral candidates Sergio Biggemann, 
Martin Williams, Reiny Iriana and Chris Baumann. Thank you, and 
congratulations on your own achievements: you are all Doctors now. 
May you continue to be successful. Jana Bowden also reviewed early 
drafts of chapters. You’re the next to graduate. 
  A number of academic colleagues past, present and perhaps future, 
have also contributed feedback on drafts or engaged in helpful debate 
and discussion, amongst them Lawrence Ang, David Ballantyne, Sue 
Creswick, Christine Ennew, Robert East, John Murphy, Pete Naude, 
Sharon Murray, Adrian Payne, Thomas Ritter, Willem Selen, Alan 
Thomas, Ian Wilkinson, Steve Worthington and Louise Young. 
   I’d like to thank a number of clients with whom I’ve worked, 
including DNAML, MGSM, Microsoft, NIB, Nu-Wa, SAS and PLAUT. 
Special mention goes to Adam Schmidt, Bill Gates, Asha Oudit, Bob 
Knox, Helene Cederqvist and David Prior. 
   Many publishers, companies and authors have granted permission for 
their copyright materials to be reproduced in this book. These include 
photographs, line drawings, conceptual models, research data and 
screenshots. Every effort has been made to identify and contact copyright 
owners, and I am very pleased to acknowledge their contributions in 
the body of the book and in chapter endnotes. In the event that there 
has been any failure to acknowledge a source appropriately, please let 
me know and I’ll correct the omission or amend the error at the ﬁ  rst 
opportunity. 
   To all those at Elsevier who have been involved in the process of 
bringing the book to market I extend a vote of thanks: Ailsa Marks, Tim 
Goodfellow, Liz Burton, Sarah You and Stephani Allison. Appreciation is 
also extended to Lewis Buttle of eLAB Design who designed the cover. 

===== PAGE 20 =====
 
Acknowledgements xix
   Thanks, too, to my colleagues at Francis Buttle  &  Associates (www.
buttleassociates.com) including Sam English, Lawrence Ang, Lee 
Williams, Abdullah Aldlaigan and Rizal Ahmad. Also, I appreciate the 
support of colleagues at Listening Post ( www.listeningpost.com.au ), 
particularly Leigh Thomas, David Young and Andrew Jones. 
   Finally, if you want to get in touch about the book, you can reach me 
at francis@buttleassociates.com  

===== PAGE 21 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 22 =====
 
Francis Buttle, PhD, is founder and principal consultant of Francis Buttle & 
Associates, a Sydney, Australia-based business that helps organizations 
become more skilled and successful at customer acquisition, retention 
and development. Francis has spent most of the last 30 years in various 
academic roles around the world. He has been a Professor of Customer 
Relationship Management, Professor of Marketing, Professor of Relation-
ship Marketing and Professor of Management at a number of leading 
graduate schools of management, including Manchester Business School 
(UK), Cranﬁ eld School of Management (UK) and Macquarie Graduate 
School of Management (Australia). He was appointed as the world’s ﬁ rst 
Professor of CRM in 1995, and remains an Adjunct Professor at MGSM.
Francis has authored, co-authored or edited seven books, and over 
100 peer-reviewed academic journal articles or conference papers. 
In addition, he is a frequent contributor to practitioner magazines, 
presenter at business conferences and a serial blogger.
Francis has developed, run or contributed to many management 
development programs, and has advised or consulted to numerous for-
proﬁ t and not-for-proﬁ t organizations in the UK, Australia, USA, Hong 
Kong, Singapore and New Zealand.
Although he quit full-time academic life in 2006, he still supervises 
doctoral candidates and conducts customer-related research. Francis 
lives on Sydney’s North Shore, is a qualiﬁ  ed but reluctantly retired 
rugby union referee, enjoys cycling and kayaking, and rides a Suzuki.
Francis has degrees in management science, marketing and 
communication. His PhD was earned at the University of Massachusetts. 
He is an elected Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Marketing. He can 
be contacted at francis@buttleassociates.com.
About the author

===== PAGE 23 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 24 =====
 
    Introduction to 
customer relationship 
management
 Chapter 1 

===== PAGE 25 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 26 =====
 
           Chapter objectives      
   By the end of this chapter, you will be aware of: 
    1.   four major perspectives on CRM: strategic, operational, analytical and collaborative  
    2.   several common misunderstandings about CRM  
    3.   a deﬁ nition of CRM  
    4.   the six constituencies having an interest in CRM  
    5.   how important CRM issues vary across industries  
    6.   ﬁ ve generic models of CRM.         
    Introduction 
   The expression customer relationship management (CRM) has only been 
in use since the early 1990s. Since then there have been many attempts 
to deﬁ ne the domain of CRM, a number of which appear in  Table 1.1   . As 
a relatively immature business or organizational practice, a consensus 
has not yet emerged about what counts as CRM. Even the meaning 
of the three-letter acronym CRM is contested. For example, although 
most people would understand that CRM means customer relationship 
management, others have used the acronym to mean customer 
relationship marketing.  
1
   Information technology (IT) companies have tended to use the term 
CRM to describe the software applications that automate the marketing, 
selling and service functions of businesses. This equates CRM with 
technology. Although the market for CRM software is now populated 
with many players, it started in 1993 when Tom Siebel founded Siebel 
Systems Inc. Use of the term CRM can be traced back to that period. 
Forrester, the technology research organization, estimates that worldwide 
spending on CRM technologies will reach US$11 billion per annum by 
2010.
2   Others with a managerial rather than technological emphasis, 
claim that CRM is a disciplined approach to developing and maintaining 
proﬁ table customer relationships, and that technology may or may not 
have a role. 
   Some of the differences of opinion can be explained by considering 
that a number of different types of CRM have been identiﬁ  ed: strategic, 
operational, analytical and collaborative, as summarized in  Table 1.2    and 
described below.  

===== PAGE 27 =====
 
4 Customer Relationship Management
Type of CRM Dominant characteristic
Strategic Strategic CRM is a core customer-centric business strategy that aims at winning 
and keeping proﬁ  table customers
Operational Operational CRM focuses on the automation of customer-facing processes such 
as selling, marketing and customer service
Analytical Analytical CRM focuses on the intelligent mining of customer-related data for 
strategic or tactical purposes
Collaborative Collaborative CRM applies technology across organizational boundaries with a 
view to optimizing company, partner and customer value
Table 1.2        Types of 
CRM  
    Strategic CRM 
  Strategic CRM is focused upon the development of a customer-centric 
business culture. This culture is dedicated to winning and keeping 
customers by creating and delivering value better than competitors. The 
culture is reﬂ ected in leadership behaviours, the design of formal systems 
of the company, and the myths and stories that are created within the 
ﬁ rm. In a customer-centric culture you would expect resources to be 
allocated where they would best enhance customer value, reward systems 
Table 1.1    
   Deﬁ nitions of CRM  
CRM is an information industry term for methodologies, software and usually Internet capabilities that 
help an enterprise manage customer relationships in an organized way.3
CRM is the process of managing all aspects of interaction a company has with its customers, including 
prospecting, sales and service. CRM applications attempt to provide insight into and improve the 
company/customer relationship by combining all these views of customer interaction into one picture.
4
CRM is an integrated approach to identifying, acquiring and retaining customers. By enabling 
organizations to manage and coordinate customer interactions across multiple channels, departments, 
lines of business and geographies, CRM helps organizations maximize the value of every customer 
interaction and drive superior corporate performance.5
CRM is an integrated information system that is used to plan, schedule and control the pre-sales 
and post-sales activities in an organization. CRM embraces all aspects of dealing with prospects and 
customers, including the call centre, sales-force, marketing, technical support and ﬁ  eld service. The 
primary goal of CRM is to improve long-term growth and proﬁ  tability through a better understanding of 
customer behaviour. CRM aims to provide more effective feedback and improved integration to better 
gauge the return on investment (ROI) in these areas.
6
CRM is a business strategy that maximizes proﬁ  tability, revenue and customer satisfaction by organizing 
around customer segments, fostering behaviour that satisﬁ  es customers and implementing customer-
centric processes.
7

===== PAGE 28 =====
 
Introduction to customer relationship management 5
to promote employee behaviours that enhance customer satisfaction 
and retention, and customer information to be collected, shared and 
applied across the business. You would also expect to ﬁ  nd the heroes 
of the business to be those who deliver outstanding value or service to 
customers. Many businesses claim to be customer-centric, customer-led, 
customer-focused or customer-oriented, but few are. Indeed, there can 
be very few companies of any size that do not claim that they are on a 
mission to satisfy customer requirements proﬁ tably. 
   Customer-centricity competes with other business logics. Philip Kotler 
identiﬁ es three other major business orientations: product, production, 
and selling.  
8
Product-oriented  businesses believe that customers choose products 
with the best quality, performance, design or features. These are often 
highly innovative and entrepreneurial ﬁ rms. Many new business start-ups 
are product-oriented. In these ﬁ rms it is common for the customer’s voice 
to be missing when important marketing, selling or service decisions are 
made. Little or no customer research is conducted. Management makes 
assumptions about what customers want. The outcome is that sometimes 
products are overspeciﬁ ed or overengineered for the requirements of the 
market, and therefore too costly for many customers. However, marketers 
have identiﬁ ed a subset of relatively price-insensitive customers whom 
they dub ‘ innovators ’ , who are likely to respond positively to company 
claims about product excellence. Unfortunately, this is a relatively small 
segment, no more than 2.5 per cent of the potential market. 
9
Production-oriented  businesses believe that customers choose low-
price products. Consequently, these businesses strive to keep operating 
costs low, and develop low-cost routes to market. This may well be 
appropriate in developing economies or in subsistence segments 
of developed economies, but the majority of customers have other 
requirements. Drivers of BMWs would not be attracted to the brand 
if they knew that the company only sourced inputs such as braking 
systems from the lowest-cost supplier. 
Sales-oriented  businesses make the assumption that if they invest 
enough in advertising, selling, public relations (PR) and sales promotion, 
customers will be persuaded to buy. Very often, a sales orientation follows 
a production orientation. The company produces low-cost products and 
then has to promote them heavily to shift inventory. 
  A   customer  or  market-oriented  company shares a set of beliefs about 
putting the customer ﬁ  rst. It collects, disseminates and uses customer 
and competitive information to develop better value propositions for 
customers. A customer-centric ﬁ  rm is a learning ﬁ  rm that constantly 
adapts to customer requirements and competitive conditions. There 
is evidence that customer-centricity correlates strongly with business 
performance.
10
   Many managers would argue that customer-centricity must be right 
for all companies. However, at different stages of market or economic 
development, other orientations may have stronger appeal.

===== PAGE 29 =====
 
6 Customer Relationship Management
       Case 1.1   
  Strategic CRM at Boise Ofﬁ ce Solutions      
   In 1998 the CEO of Itasca, Illinois-based Boise Ofﬁ ce Solutions, decided that the only way to 
escape the bruising price competition and razor-thin margins of ofﬁ  ce supply superstores 
such as Staples and Ofﬁ  ce Depot was to provide greater value through superior customer 
service, with the support of a CRM system. Three years and $20 million later, the $3.5 billion 
subsidiary of Boise Cascade switched on a CRM system that differentiated them from other 
competitors in the ofﬁ  ce supplies industry. The company can now share customer data 
across ﬁ ve business units, 47 distribution centres and three customer service centres. This 
has allowed Boise to cross-sell, retain and service accounts much more effectively. One of the 
CRM system’s many features is web collaboration which allows representatives to co-browse 
and chat with customers online while making recommendations. 
   Source: Greenguard (2002)  11
Marketing automation
Market segmentation
Campaign management
Event-based (trigger) marketing
Sales force automation
Account management
Lead management
Opportunity management
Pipeline management
Contact management
Quotation and proposal generation
Product conﬁ  guration
Service automation
Case (incident or issue) management
Inbound communications management
Queuing and routing
Service level management
Table 1.3        
Operational CRM  
    Operational CRM 
  Operational CRM automates and improves customer-facing and customer-
supporting business processes. CRM software applications enable the 
marketing, selling and service functions to be automated and integrated. 
Some of the major applications within operational CRM appear in Table 
1.3   . Although we cover the technology aspects of operational CRM in 
Chapters 14, 15 and 16, it is worth making a few observations at this point. 

===== PAGE 30 =====
 
Introduction to customer relationship management 7
    Marketing automation 
  Marketing automation (MA) applies technology to marketing processes. 
Campaign management modules allow marketers to use customer-related 
data in order to develop, execute and evaluate targeted communications 
and offers. Customer targeting for campaigning purposes is, in some 
cases, possible at the level of the individual customer, enabling unique 
communications to be designed. 
   In multichannel environments, campaign management is particularly 
challenging. Some fashion retailers, for example, have multiple 
transactional channels including free-standing stores, department store 
concessions, e-tail websites, home shopping catalogues, catalogue stores 
and perhaps even a television shopping channel. Some customers may 
be unique to a single channel, but most will be multichannel prospects, 
if they are not already customers of several channels. Integration of 
communication and offer strategies and evaluation of performance 
requires a substantial amount of technology-aided coordination across 
these channels. 
  Event-based, or trigger, marketing is the term used to describe 
messaging and offer presentation to customers at particular points in time. 
An event triggers the communication and offer. Event-based campaigns 
can be initiated by customer behaviours or contextual conditions. A call 
to a contact centre is an example of a customer-initiated event. When a 
credit-card customer calls a contact centre to enquire about the current rate 
of interest, this can be taken as indication that the customer is comparing 
alternatives and may switch to a different provider. This event may trigger 
an offer designed to retain the customer. Examples of contextual events 
are the birth of a child or a public holiday. Both of these indicate potential 
changes in buyer behaviour, initiating a marketing response. Event-based 
marketing also occurs in the business-to-business context. The event may 
be a change of personnel on the customer-side, the approaching expiry of 
a contract or a request for information (RFI). 
    Sales-force automation 
   Sales-force automation (SFA) was the original form of operational 
CRM. SFA systems are now widely adopted in business-to-business 
environments and are seen as  ‘ a competitive imperative ’ 12   that offers 
 ‘ competitive parity ’ .  13
  SFA applies technology to the management of a company’s selling 
activities. The selling process can be decomposed into a number of 
stages, such as lead generation, lead qualiﬁ  cation, needs identiﬁ cation, 
development of speciﬁ cations, proposal generation, proposal presentation, 
handling objections and closing the sale. SFA software can be conﬁ gured so 
that it is modelled on the selling process of any industry or organization. 
  Automation of selling activities is often linked to efforts to improve 
and standardize the selling process. This involves the implementation 
of a sales methodology. Sales methodologies allow sales team members 
and management to adopt a standardized view of the sales cycle and a 
common language for discussion of sales issues. 

===== PAGE 31 =====
 
8 Customer Relationship Management
  Sales-force automation software enables companies automatically to 
assign leads and track opportunities as they progress through the sales 
pipeline towards closure. Opportunity management lets users identify 
and progress opportunities to sell from lead status through to closure 
and beyond, into after-sales support. Opportunity management software 
usually contains lead management and sales forecasting applications. 
Lead management applications enable users to qualify leads and assign 
them to the appropriate salesperson. Sales forecasting functionality 
generally use transactional histories and salesperson estimates to produce 
estimates of future sales. 
   Contact management lets users manage their communications 
programme with customers. Computerized customer records contain 
customer contact histories. Contact management applications often have 
features such as automatic customer dialling, the salesperson’s personal 
calendar and e-mail functionality. Quotation and proposal generation 
allow the salesperson to automate the production of prices and proposals 
for customers. The salesperson enters details such as product codes, 
volumes, customer name and delivery requirements, and the software 
automatically generates a priced quotation. 
   Product conﬁ guration applications enable salespeople, or the 
customers themselves, automatically to design and price customized 
products, services or solutions to problems. Conﬁ  gurators are useful 
when the product is particularly complex, such as in IT solutions. 
Conﬁ gurators are typically based on an  ‘ if  …  then ’  rules structure. The 
general case of this rule is  ‘ If X is chosen, then Y is required or prohibited 
or legitimized or unaffected ’ . For example, if the customer chooses a 
particular feature (say, a particular hard drive for a computer), then this 
rules out certain other choices or related features that are technologically 
incompatible, too costly or too complex to manufacture.
       Case 1.2   
  Operational CRM (SFA) at Roche      
   Roche is one of the world’s leading research-based healthcare organizations, active in the 
discovery, development and manufacture of pharmaceuticals and diagnostic systems. The 
organization has traditionally been product-centric and quite poor in the area of customer 
management. Roche’s customers are medical practitioners prescribing products to patients. 
Customer information was previously collected through several mutually exclusive sources, 
ranging from personal visits to handwritten correspondence, and not integrated into a 
database or central ﬁ ling system, giving incomplete views of the customer. Roche identiﬁ  ed 
the need to adopt a more customer-centric approach to understand their customers better, 
improve services offered to them and to increase sales effectiveness. 
  Roche implemented a sales-force automation system where all data and interactions with 
customers are stored in a central database which can be accessed throughout the organization. 
This has resulted in Roche being able to create customer proﬁ  les, segment customers and 
communicate with existing and potential customers. Since implementation Roche has been 
more successful in identifying, winning and retaining customers. 

===== PAGE 32 =====
 
Introduction to customer relationship management 9
    Service automation 
   Service automation allows companies to manage their service operations, 
whether delivered through call centre, contact centre, web or face-to-face. 14
CRM software enables companies to handle and coordinate their service-
related inbound and outbound communications across all channels. 
Software vendors claim that this enables users to become more efﬁ  cient 
and effective by reducing service costs, improving service quality, lifting 
productivity and increasing customer satisfaction. 
  Service automation differs signiﬁ  cantly depending on the product 
being serviced. Consumer products are normally serviced through retail 
outlets, the web or a call centre as the point of ﬁ rst contact. These contact 
channels are often supported by online scripting tools to help diagnose 
a problem on ﬁ  rst contact. A number of technologies are common in 
service automation. Call routing software can be used to direct inbound 
calls to the most appropriate handler. Technologies such as interactive 
voice response (IVR) enable customers to interact with company 
computers. Customers can input to an IVR system after listening to menu 
instructions either by telephone keypad (key 1 for option A, key 2 for 
option B) or by voice. If ﬁ  rst contact problem resolution is not possible, 
the service process may then involve authorizing a return of goods, and a 
repair cycle involving a third party service provider. This process is used 
to service mobile phones and cameras. 
   Service automation for large capital equipment is quite different. This 
normally involves diagnostic and corrective action to be taken in the 
ﬁ eld, at the location of the equipment. Examples of this type of service 
include industrial air conditioning and refrigeration. In these cases, 
service automation may involve providing the service technician with 
diagnostics, repair manuals, inventory management and job information 
on a laptop. This information is then synchronized at regular intervals to 
update the central CRM system. 
   Many companies use a combination of direct and indirect channels 
especially for sales and service functions. When indirect channels are 
employed, operational CRM supports this function through partner 
relationship management (PRM). This technology allows partners to 
communicate with the supplier through a portal, to manage leads, sales 
orders, product information and incentives. 
    Analytical CRM 
  Analytical CRM is concerned with capturing, storing, extracting, 
integrating, processing, interpreting, distributing, using and reporting 
customer-related data to enhance both customer and company value. 
  Analytical CRM builds on the foundation of customer-related 
information. Customer-related data may be found in enterprise-wide 
repositories: sales data (purchase history), ﬁ nancial data (payment history, 
credit score), marketing data (campaign response, loyalty scheme data) 
and service data. To these internal data can be added data from external 

===== PAGE 33 =====
 
10 Customer Relationship Management
sources: geodemographic and lifestyle data from business intelligence 
organizations, for example. With the application of data mining tools, a 
company can then interrogate these data. Intelligent interrogation provides 
answers to questions such as: Who are our most valuable customers? 
Which customers have the highest propensity to switch to competitors? 
Which customers would be most likely to respond to a particular offer?
       Case 1.3   
  Analytical CRM at AXA Seguros e Inversiones (AXA)      
   Spanish insurer AXA Seguros e Inversiones (AXA) has revenues of over €1.8 billion (US$2.3 
billion), two million customers and is a member of global giant The AXA Group. 
  AXA runs marketing campaigns in Spain for its many products and services. The 
company wanted a better understanding of its customers, in order to be able to make more 
personalized offers and implement customer loyalty campaigns. 
  AXA used CRM vendor SAS’s data mining solution to build a predictive policy cancellation 
model. The solution creates proﬁ  les and predictive models from customer data which 
enables more ﬁ  nely targeted campaign management, call centre management, sales-force 
automation and other activities involved in customer relationship management. 
   The model was applied to current and cancelled policies in various ofﬁ  ces, to validate it 
before deploying it across Spain. Moreover, the model was used to create two control groups 
(subdivided into high and low probability) that were not targeted in any way, while other 
groups, similarly divided into high and low probability, were targeted by various marketing 
actions. The outcome was that the auto insurance policy cancellation rate was cut by up to 
nine percentage points in speciﬁ c targeted segments. 
   With the customer insight obtained from the model, AXA is now able to design and execute 
personalized actions and customer loyalty campaigns tailored to the needs and expectations 
of high-value customers. 
   Source: SAS  15
  Analytical CRM has become an essential part of many CRM 
implementations. Operational CRM struggles to reach full effectiveness 
without analytical information about customers. For example, an 
understanding of customer value or propensities to buy underpins many 
operational CRM decisions, such as: 
●      Which customers shall we target with this offer?  
●      What is the relative priority of customers waiting on the line, and 
what level of service should be offered?  
●      Where should I focus my sales effort?    
  Analytical CRM can lead companies to decide that selling approaches 
should differ between customer groups. Higher potential value 
customers may be offered face-to-face selling; lower value customers 
may be contacted by telesales. Furthermore, the content and style of 
customer communications can be tailored, perhaps for a particular 

===== PAGE 34 =====
 
Introduction to customer relationship management 11
segment, using customer analytics. This enhances the probability that a 
given offer will be accepted by the customer. 
   From the customer’s point of view, analytical CRM can deliver timely, 
customized, solutions to the customer’s problems, thereby enhancing 
customer satisfaction. From the company’s point of view, analytical 
CRM offers the prospect of more powerful cross-selling and up-selling 
programmes, and more effective customer retention and customer 
acquisition programmes.  
    Collaborative CRM 
   Collaborative CRM is the term used to describe the strategic and tactical 
alignment of normally separate enterprises in the supply chain for the 
more proﬁ table identiﬁ  cation, attraction, retention and development 
of customers. 16   For example, manufacturers of consumer goods and 
retailers can align their people, processes and technologies to serve 
shoppers more efﬁ ciently and effectively. They employ practices such as 
co-marketing, category management, collaborative forecasting, joint new 
product development and joint market research. Collaborative CRM uses 
CRM technologies to communicate and transact across organizational 
boundaries. Although traditional technologies such as surface mail, air 
mail, telephone and fax enable this to happen, the term is usually applied 
to more recent technologies such as electronic data interchange (EDI), 
portals, e-business, voice over internet protocol (VoIP), conferencing, 
chat rooms, web forums and e-mail. These technologies allow data and 
voice communication between companies and their business partners or 
customers. Collaborative CRM enables separate organizations to align 
their efforts to service customers more effectively. It allows valuable 
information to be shared along the supply chain. 
  Some CRM technology vendors have developed partner relationship 
management (PRM) applications that enable companies to manage 
complex partner or channel ecosystems and reduce the costs of partner 
or channel management. PRM applications are often used to manage 
partner promotions. A manufacturer of consumer goods might have a 
dozen or more different cooperative advertising programmes running 
simultaneously. PRM allows companies to manage the distribution of 
funds, plan and control promotions and measure outcomes. Sometimes 
the term collaborative CRM is used to describe the application of these 
same technologies to internal communications, for example across sales, 
marketing and service functions.
       Case 1.4   
  Partner relationship management at Segway      
   The Segway® Personal Transporter (PT) is the world’s ﬁ  rst two-wheeled, self-balancing, 
electric transportation device; a product that has gained worldwide attention. Since the 

===== PAGE 35 =====
 
12 Customer Relationship Management
    Misunderstandings 
about CRM 
   Given its recent emergence, it isn’t surprising that there are a number 
of common misunderstandings about the nature of CRM. These are 
described below. 
    Misunderstanding 1: CRM is database 
marketing
  Database marketing is concerned with building and exploiting high 
quality customer databases for marketing purposes. Companies collect 
data from a number of sources. These data are veriﬁ ed, cleaned, integrated 
and stored on computers, often in data warehouses or data-marts. They 
are then used for marketing purposes such as market segmentation, 
targeting, offer development and customer communication. 
  Whereas most large and medium-sized companies do indeed build and 
exploit customer databases, CRM is much wider in scope than database 
marketing. A lot of what we have described above as analytical CRM has 
the appearance of database marketing. However, database marketing is 
less evident in strategic, operational and collaborative CRM. 
Segway PT ﬁ rst went on sale in 2002, the company has enjoyed 50 per cent annual growth as 
commercial and consumer customers adopted it for its versatility, energy efﬁ ciency and ease 
of use. 
   Based in Bedford, New Hampshire, Segway has a worldwide distribution network of more 
than 250 outlets in 62 countries. About 90 per cent of Segway’s business comes through this 
network of dealers and distributors. 
   The company wanted to deploy an integrated solution that could manage both direct and 
indirect sales activities in a cohesive way. The solution was the development of the Segway 
Partner Portal, a secure website that allows Segway employees and channel partners to 
manage sales processes effectively. The portal has two major functions: 
    1.     Delivering and managing sales leads from the Segway.com website, tradeshows, 
advertising campaigns and various other sources.  
    2.     Reporting retail sales for participation in Segway incentive programmes.    
   Segway has about 120 dealers in North America, more than 75 per cent of which have 
already adopted the PRM solution. Each dealership has its own account and login 
information, with access to the data that concerns it. Segway’s regional managers can roll up 
the data to obtain a comprehensive view of sales and forecasts. 
   Source: Salesforce.com  17

===== PAGE 36 =====
 
Introduction to customer relationship management 13
    Misunderstanding 2: CRM is a marketing 
process 
  CRM software applications are used for many marketing activities: market 
segmentation, customer acquisition, customer retention and customer 
development (cross-selling and up-selling), for example. However, 
operational CRM extends into selling and service functions. 
   The deployment of CRM software to support a company’s mission to 
become more customer-centric often means that customer-related data 
is shared more widely throughout the enterprise than by the marketing 
function alone. Operations management can use customer-related data 
to produce customized products and services. People management 
(Human Resources) can use customer preference data to help recruit and 
train staff for the front-line jobs that interface with customers. Research 
and development management can use customer-related data to focus 
new product development. 
  Customer data can not only be used to integrate various internal 
departments, but can also be shared across the extended enterprise with 
outside suppliers and partners. For example, Tesco, the international 
supermarket operation, has a number of collaborative new product 
development relationships with key suppliers. Tesco also partners with 
Royal Bank of Scotland to offer ﬁ nancial services to Tesco customers. Both 
these activities require the sharing of information about Tesco customers 
with supplier and partner. Clearly, there is more to CRM than marketing 
process. 
    Misunderstanding 3: CRM is an IT issue 
  Many CRM implementations are seen as IT initiatives, rather than 
broader strategic initiatives. True, most CRM implementations require the 
deployment of IT solutions. However, this should not be misunderstood. 
To say that CRM is about IT is like saying that gardening is about the 
spade or that art is about the paintbrush. IT is an enabler, a facilitator. 
Improvements come about in the way customers are managed through a 
combination of improved processes, the right competencies and attitudes 
(people), the right strategies and the right enabling technologies. 
   The importance of people and processes should not be underestimated. 
People develop and implement the processes that are enabled by IT. IT 
cannot compensate for bad processes and unskilled people. Successful 
CRM implementations involve people designing and implementing 
processes that deliver customer and company value. Often, these 
processes are IT-enabled. IT is therefore a part of most CRM strategies. 
   That said, not all CRM initiatives involve IT investments. An 
overarching goal of many CRM projects is the development of 
relationships with, and retention of, highly valued customers. This may 
involve behavioural changes in store employees, education of call centre 
staff, and a focus on empathy and reliability from salespeople. IT may 
play no role at all.  

===== PAGE 37 =====
 
14 Customer Relationship Management
    Misunderstanding 4: CRM is about loyalty 
schemes
  Loyalty schemes are commonplace in many industries, such as car hire, 
airlines, food retail, hotels. Customers accumulate credits, such as airmiles, 
from purchases. These are then redeemed at some future point. Most 
loyalty schemes require new members to complete an application form 
when they join the programme. This demographic information is typically 
used, together with purchasing data, to help companies become more 
effective at customer communication and offer development. Whereas 
some CRM implementations are linked to loyalty schemes not all are. 
   Loyalty schemes may play two roles in CRM implementations. First, 
they generate data that can be used to guide customer acquisition, 
retention and development. Secondly, loyalty schemes may serve as an 
exit barrier. Customers who have accumulated credits in a scheme may 
be reluctant to exit the relationship. The credits accumulated reﬂ  ect the 
value of the investment that the customer has made in the scheme, and 
therefore in the relationship.  
    Misunderstanding 5: CRM can be implemented 
by any company 
   Strategic CRM can, indeed, be implemented in any company. Every 
organization can be driven by a desire to be more customer-centric. Chief 
executives can establish a vision, mission and set of values that bring the 
customer into the heart of the business. CRM technology may play a role 
in that transformation. Some companies are certainly more successful 
than others. The banking industry has implemented CRM very widely, 
yet there are signiﬁ  cant differences between the customer satisfaction 
ratings and customer retention rates of different banks. 
  Any company can also try to implement operational CRM. Any 
company with a sales force can automate its selling, lead management 
and contact management processes. The same is true for marketing and 
service processes. CRM technology can be used to support marketing 
campaigns, service requests and complaints management. 
  Analytical CRM is a different matter, as it is based on customer-related 
data. At the very least, data are needed to identify which customers are 
likely to generate most value in the future, and to identify within the 
customer base segments that have different requirements. Only then can 
different offers be communicated to each customer group to optimize 
company and customer value over the long term. If these data are 
missing then analytical CRM cannot be implemented. 
    Deﬁ ning CRM 
  Against this background of four types of CRM and the misunderstandings 
about CRM, it is no easy matter to settle on a single deﬁ  nition of CRM. 

===== PAGE 38 =====
 
Introduction to customer relationship management 15
However, we can identify a number of core CRM attributes, and integrate 
them into a deﬁ nition that underpins the rest of this book. 
CRM is the core business strategy that integrates internal processes 
and functions, and external networks, to create and deliver value to 
targeted customers at a proﬁ t. It is grounded on high quality customer-
related data and enabled by information technology.
   CRM is a  ‘ core business strategy ’  that aims to  ‘ create and deliver value 
to targeted customers at a proﬁ  t ’ . This clearly denotes that CRM is not 
just about IT. CRM  ‘ integrates internal processes and functions ’ . That 
is, it allows departments within businesses to dissolve the silo walls 
that separate them. Access to  ‘ customer-related data ’  allows selling, 
marketing and service functions to be aware of each other’s interactions 
with customers. Furthermore, back-ofﬁ  ce functions such as operations 
and ﬁ nance can learn from and contribute to customer-related data. 
Access to customer-related data allows members of a business’s  ‘ external 
network ’  – suppliers, partners, distributors – to align their efforts with 
those of the focal company. Underpinning this core business strategy is 
IT: software applications and hardware. 
   Historically, most companies were located close to the markets they 
served, and knew their customers intimately. Very often there would 
be face-to-face, even day-to-day, interaction with customers where 
knowledge of customer requirements and preferences grew. However, as 
companies have grown larger they have become more remote from the 
customers they serve. The remoteness is not only geographic; it may also 
be cultural. Even some of the most widely admired American companies 
have not always understood the markets they served. Disney’s 
development of a theme park near the French capital, Paris, was not an 
initial success because they failed to deliver to the value expectations of 
European customers. For example, Disney failed to offer visitors alcohol 
onsite. Europeans, however, are accustomed to enjoying a glass or two 
of wine with their food. 
  Geographic and cultural remoteness, together with business owner 
and management separation from customer contact, means that many, 
even small, companies do not have the intuitive knowledge and 
understanding of their customers so often found in micro-businesses, such 
as neighbourhood stores and hairdressing salons. This has given rise to 
demand for better customer-related data, a cornerstone of effective CRM. 
  Our deﬁ nition has a strong for-proﬁ  t sense. If the not-for-proﬁ  t 
community were to replace the words business, customers and proﬁ  t 
with appropriate equivalents, such as organization, clients and objectives, 
it would apply equally well in that context. 
   In sum, we take the view that CRM is a technology-enabled approach 
to management of the customer interface. Most CRM initiatives expect to 
have impact on the costs-to-serve and revenues streams from customers. 
The use of technology also changes the customer’s experience of 
transacting and communicating with a supplier. For that reason, the 
customer’s perspective on CRM is an important consideration in this 
book. CRM inﬂ  uences customer experience, and that is of fundamental 
strategic signiﬁ cance.  

===== PAGE 39 =====
 
16 Customer Relationship Management
    CRM constituencies 
   There are several important constituencies having an interest in CRM: 
    1 .       Companies  implementing CRM: many companies have implemented 
CRM. Early adopters were larger companies in ﬁ  nancial services, 
telecommunications and manufacturing, in the USA and Europe. 
Medium-sized businesses are following. There is still potential 
for the CRM message to reach smaller companies, public sector 
organizations, other worldwide markets and new business start-ups.  
    2 .       Customers and partners of those companies  : the customers and 
partners of companies that implement CRM are a particularly 
important constituency. Because CRM inﬂ uences customer experience, 
it can impact on customer satisfaction ratings and inﬂ  uence loyalty to 
the supplier.  
    3 .       Vendors of CRM software : vendors of CRM software include names 
such as Oracle, SAP , SAS, KANA, Microsoft and StayinFront. There 
has been considerable consolidation of the CRM vendor marketplace 
in recent years. PeopleSoft and Siebel, two of the pioneering CRM 
vendors, are currently owned by Oracle. Vendors sell licenses to 
companies, and install CRM software on the customer’s servers either 
directly or through system integrators. The client’s people are trained 
to use the software.  
    4 .       CRM application service providers (ASPs) : companies implementing 
CRM can also choose to access CRM functionality on a subscription 
basis through hosted CRM vendors such as salesforce.com, Entellium, 
RightNow and NetSuite. Clients upload their customer data to the 
host’s servers and interact with the data using their web browsers. 
The ASP vendors deliver and manage applications and other services 
from remote sites to multiple users via the Internet. This is also known 
as SaaS (Software as a Service). Clients access CRM functionality in 
much the same way as they would eBay or Amazon.  
   5 .       Vendors of CRM hardware and infrastructure  : hardware and 
infrastructure vendors provide the technological foundations for CRM 
implementations. They supply technologies such as servers, computers, 
handheld devices, call centre hardware, and telephony systems. 
    6 .       Management consultants : consultancies offer clients a diverse range 
of CRM-related capabilities such as strategy, business, application and 
technical consulting. Consultants can help companies implementing 
CRM in several ways: systems integration, choosing between different 
vendors, developing implementation plans and project management 
as the implementation is rolled out. Most CRM implementations are 
composed of a large number of smaller projects, for example, systems 
integration, data quality improvement, market segmentation, process 
engineering and culture change. The major consultancies such as 
Accenture, McKinsey, Bearing Point, Braxton and CGEY all offer CRM 
consultancy. Smaller companies sometimes offer specialized expertise. 
Peppers and Rogers provide strategy consulting. DunnHumby is 
known for its expertise in data mining for segmentation purposes. 

===== PAGE 40 =====
 
Introduction to customer relationship management 17
    Commercial contexts 
of CRM 
   CRM is practised in a wide variety of commercial contexts, which present 
a range of different customer relationship management problems. We’ll 
consider four contexts: banks, automobile manufacturers, high-tech 
companies and consumer goods manufacturers. 
●       Banks  deal with a large number of individual retail customers. Banks 
want CRM for its analytical capability to help them manage customer 
defection (churn) rates and to enhance cross-sell performance. Data 
mining techniques can be used to identify which customers are likely 
to defect, what can be done to win them back, which customers are 
hot prospects for cross-sell offers, and how best to communicate those 
offers. Banks want to win a greater share of customer spend (share 
of wallet) on ﬁ  nancial services. In terms of operational CRM, many 
banks have been transferring service into contact centres and online 
in an effort to reduce costs, in the face of considerable resistance from 
some customer segments.  
●       Automobile manufacturers  sell through distributor/dealer networks. 
They have little contact with the end-user owner or driver. They use 
CRM for its ability to help them develop better and more proﬁ  table 
relationships with their distribution networks. Being physically 
disconnected from drivers, they have built websites that enable them 
to interact with these end-users. This has improved their knowledge 
of customer requirements. Ultimately, they hope CRM will enable 
them to win a greater share of end-user spend across the car purchase, 
maintenance and replacement cycle.  
●       High-tech companies   manufacture complex products that are 
generally sold by partner organizations. For example, small innovative 
software developers have traditionally partnered with companies 
such as IBM to obtain distribution and sales. However, companies 
like Dell have innovated channels. They go direct-to-customer (DTC). 
CRM helps these DTC companies to collect customer information, 
segment their customer base, automate their sales processes with 
product conﬁ gurator software and deliver their customer service 
online. They have also developed automated relationships with 
suppliers, so that they carry no or low levels of inventory, which are 
replenished frequently in rapid response to order patterns.  
●       Consumer goods manufacturers   deal with the retail trade. They use 
CRM to help them develop proﬁ  table relationships with retailers. 
CRM helps them understand costs-to-serve and customer proﬁ tability. 
Key account management practices are applied to strategically 
signiﬁ cant customers. IT-enabled purchasing processes deliver 
higher levels of accuracy in stock replenishment. Manufacturers 
can run CRM-enabled marketing campaigns which are highly cost-
effective.     

===== PAGE 41 =====
 
18 Customer Relationship Management
    The not-for-proﬁ t context 
   Most of this chapter has been concerned with CRM in the for-proﬁ  t 
context. However, CRM can also be found in the not-for-proﬁ  t context. 
Some of the basic skills of database development and exploitation, and 
customer lifecycle management, are equally relevant to not-for-proﬁ  t 
organizations. 
   The Salvation Army uses CRM capability to manage donor 
relationships, over time, using event-based fundraising. The Army also 
knows the value of different donor segments, and works at retaining 
their high value donors and at migrating ﬁ  rst-time donors up the value 
ladder towards regular or long-term donor status. 
  Universities have deployed CRM to manage their student and alumni 
relationships. Today’s students are thought to represent considerable 
potential lifetime value to Universities. For example, students who enjoy their 
experiences at a graduate school of business may return there for executive 
education. They may recommend the institution to their personal networks, 
or when they reach an appropriate level of seniority commission the school 
to consult or deliver customized training and management development. 
Schools as eminent as Harvard Business School have been hugely successful 
at fundraising from their alumni networks.
       Case 1.5   
  Not-for-proﬁ t CRM at the city of Lynchburg      
   The city council of Lynchburg, VA, USA, sought to improve the levels of information 
and services that it provided to its 69 000 citizens. Named the  ‘ Citizens First Program ’ , it 
involved the design and implementation of an operational CRM strategy to open the 
lines of communication and to automate many services between the city council’s 1100 
employees, municipal departments and the citizens of Lynchburg. The project comprised the 
establishment of a website to provide citizens with 24/7 access to information concerning the 
city’s services and facilities, in addition enabling citizens to make requests for information, 
inquiries and complaints. Supporting the website was CRM software and a linked call 
centre, providing personalized follow-up and ongoing support. 
   Since implementation, many beneﬁ ts have been seen, namely: 
●      a 50% reduction in time taken to respond to citizen inquiries  
●      citizens can track the progress of requests for service, inquiries, etc.  
●      the city council can measure and report on organizational performance 
●      levels of communication within the city council and between municipal departments have 
improved. 
    Models of CRM 
  A number of comprehensive CRM models have been developed. We 
introduce ﬁ ve of them here. 

===== PAGE 42 =====
 
Introduction to customer relationship management 19
    The IDIC model 
   The IDIC model was developed by Peppers and Rogers, the consultancy 
ﬁ rm, and has featured in a number of their books. 18   The IDIC model 
suggests that companies should take four actions in order to build closer 
one-to-one relationships with customers: 
●       identify  who your customers are and build a deep understanding of 
them
●       differentiate  your customers to identify which customers have most 
value now and which offer most for the future  
●       interact  with customers to ensure that you understand customer 
expectations and their relationships with other suppliers or brands  
●       customize  the offer and communications to ensure that the expectations 
of customers are met. 
Cost-to-serve
Winback Targeting
Conversion
Welcoming
and getting
to know
Delivering
the basics
Retention
activity
Value
development
Managing
dissatisfaction
Efficiency
Penetration
Retention Acquisition
External environment
People and organisation
Analysis and planning
Customer proposition
Measurement
Customer experience
Customer
management
activity
Customer
management
activity
Infrastructure
Customer information Technology support Process management
 Figure 1.1        The QCi customer management model    
    The QCi model 
   The QCi model shown in  Figure 1.1    is also a product of a consultancy 
ﬁ rm.  19   The model’s authors prefer to describe their model as a customer 
management model, omitting the word  ‘ relationship ’ . At the heart of the 
model they depict a series of activities that companies need to perform 
in order to acquire and retain customers. The model features people 
performing processes and using technology to assist in those activities.  

===== PAGE 43 =====
 
20 Customer Relationship Management
    The CRM value chain 
  Francis Buttle’s model was the subject of a recent book. 20   The model, as 
shown in Figure 1.2   , consists of ﬁ ve primary stages and four supporting 
conditions leading towards the end goal of enhanced customer 
proﬁ tability. The primary stages of customer portfolio analysis, customer 
intimacy, network development, value proposition development and 
managing the customer lifecycle are sequenced to ensure that a company, 
with the support of its network of suppliers, partners and employees, 
creates and delivers value propositions that acquire and retain proﬁ table 
customers. The supporting conditions of leadership and culture, data and 
IT, people and processes enable the CRM strategy to function effectively 
and efﬁ ciently. 
Customer
Profitability
Customer
portfolio
analysis
Customer
intimacy
Network
development
(SCOPE)
Value
proposition
development
Manage
the
customer
lifecycle
Leadership and culture
Data and information technology
People
Processes
Primary
stages
Supporting
conditions
 Figure 1.2 
      The CRM value 
chain    
    Payne’s ﬁ ve-process model 
  The fourth comprehensive model was developed by Adrian Payne. 21
This model ( Figure 1.3   ) clearly identiﬁ es ﬁ ve core processes in CRM: 
the strategy development process, the value creation process, the 
multichannel integration process, the performance assessment process 
and the information management process. The ﬁ rst two represent strategic 
CRM; the multichannel integration process represents operational CRM; 
the information management process is analytical CRM. 
    The Gartner competency model 
   The ﬁ nal comprehensive CRM model comes from Gartner Inc. Gartner 
Inc. is a leading IT research and advisory company that employs 
some 1200 research analysts and consultants in 75 countries, and has a 
signiﬁ cant place in CRM research.  Figure 1.4    presents Gartner’s CRM 
competency model. 

===== PAGE 44 =====
 
Introduction to customer relationship management 21
Strategy
development process
Value creation
process
Multichannel Integration
process
Customer segment lifetime value analysis
Integrated channel managemnt
Performance
assessment process
Business strategy
Business vision
Industry and
competitive
characteristics
Customer strategy
Customer choice
and customer
characteristics
Segment granularity
Value Organization
receives
Acquisition
economics
Retention
economics
Value Customer
receives
Value proposition
Value assessment
Back office
applications
Front office
applications
Analysis tools
Information Management Process
IT systems
Sales force
Outlets
PhysicalVirtual
Telephony
Cocreation
Direct marketing
Electronic commerce
Mobile commerce
Data repository
Shareholder
results
Employer value
Customer value
Shareholder value
Cost reduction
Performance
monitoring
Standards
Quantitative and
qualitative
measurement
Results and
key performance
indicators
 Figure 1.3        Payne’s model of CRM22    
1. CRM vision: Leadership, Social worth, Value proposition
2. CRM strategy: Objectives, Segments, Effective interaction
8. CRM metrics: Cost to serve, Satisfaction, Loyalty, Social costs
7. CRM technology: Applications, Architecture, Infrastructure
6. CRM information: Data, Analysis, One view across channels
5. CRM processes: Customer life cycle, Knowledge management
Culture and Structure
Customer Understanding
People: Skills, Competencies
Incentives and Compensation
Employee Communications
Partners and Suppliers
4. Organizational collaboration3. Valued customer experience
Understand Requirements
Monitor Expectations
Satisfaction vs. Competition
Collaboration and Feedback
 Figure 1.4 
      Gartner’s CRM 
model    

===== PAGE 45 =====
 
22 Customer Relationship Management
  References  
       1.         Gamble, P ., Stone, M. and Woodcock, N. (1999)  Customer relationship 
marketing: up close and personal.  London: Kogan Page; Jain, S.C. 
(2005). CRM shifts the paradigm. Journal of Strategic Marketing  , Vol. 
13, December, pp. 275–291; Evans, M., O’Malley, L. and Patterson, 
M. (2004) Exploing direct and customer relationship marketing . London: 
Thomson.
       2.          http://www.forrester.com/Research/Document/Excerpt/0,7211,
43091,00.html . Accessed 13 September 2007. 
       3.          http://whatis.techtarget.com/deﬁ nition/0,289893,sid9_gci213567,
00.html . Accessed 29 November 2005. 
       4.          http://onlinebusiness.about.com/cs/marketing/g/CRM.htm . 
Accessed 29 November 2005. 
       5.          http://www.siebel.com/what-is-crm/software-solutions.shtm . 
Accessed 29 November 2005. 
       6.          http://computing-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/CRM . Accessed 
29 November 2005. 
       7.          http://www.destinationcrm.com/articles/default.asp? ArticleID /H11005     5460 .      
        Summary      
   In this chapter you have learned that the expression CRM has a variety of meanings. 
Four types of CRM have been identiﬁ  ed: strategic, operational, analytical and 
collaborative. There are many misunderstandings about CRM. For example, some people 
wrongly equate CRM with loyalty programmes, whereas others think of CRM as an IT 
issue. Although CRM is generally thought of as a business practice, it is also applied 
in the not-for-proﬁ  t context. A number of different constituencies have an interest 
in CRM, including CRM consultancies, CRM software vendors, CRM application service 
providers, CRM hardware and infrastructure vendors, companies that are implementing 
CRM and their customers. A number of different models of CRM have been developed. 
   Finally, we have produced a deﬁ nition that underpins the rest of this book. We deﬁ ne 
CRM as the core business strategy that integrates internal processes and functions, 
and external networks, to create and deliver value to targeted customers at a proﬁ  t. 
It is grounded on high quality customer-related data and enabled by information 
technology.        
   The model suggests that companies need competencies in eight 
areas for CRM to be successful. These include building a CRM vision, 
developing CRM strategies, designing valued customer experiences, 
intra and extra-organizational collaboration, managing customer lifecycle 
processes, information management, technology implementation and 
developing measures indicative of CRM success or failure.

===== PAGE 46 =====
 
Introduction to customer relationship management 23
       8.          Kotler ,   P .             ( 2000 )        Marketing management: the millennium edition             .  
 Englewood Cliffs, NJ :       Prentice-Hall International              .  
       9.          Rogers ,    E.M.             ( 1962 )        Diffusion of innovations             .  New York :       Free Press              .  
      10.          Deshpandé ,    R.             ( 1999 )        Developing a market orientation             .  London :       Sage              .  
      11.         Greenguard, S. (2002) When customer focus is king. Case study: 
Boise Ofﬁ  ce Solutions. Brief article – company proﬁ  le.  http://
ﬁ ndarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m4070/is_2002_June/ai_87430207 . 
Accessed 20 January 2008. 
      12.          Morgan ,    A.   and   Inks ,    S.A.                ( 2001 )        Technology and the sales force . 
Industrial Marketing Management       , Vol.  30      ( 5 )       ,  463  –       472        .  
      13.          Engle ,    R.L.   and   Barnes ,    M.L.                ( 2000 )        Sales force automation usage, 
effectiveness, and cost-beneﬁ t in Germany, England and the United 
States .            Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing       , Vol.  15      ( 4 )       ,  216  –       242        .  
      14.         Contact centres differ from call centres in that they not only handle 
phone calls, but also communications in other media such as mail, 
fax, e-mail and SMS. 
      15.          http://www.sas.com/success/axaseguros.html . Accessed 20 January 
2007.
      16.          Kracklauer ,    A.H.  ,   Mills ,    D.Q.   and   Seifert ,    D.  (eds)              ( 2004 )        Collaborative
customer relationship management: taking CRM to the next level           .  Berlin : 
      Springer-Verlag              .  
      17.          http://www.salesforce.com/assets/pdf/casestudies/pdf_cs_
segway.pdf . Accessed 20 January 2008. 
      18.         Peppers, D. and Rogers, M. (1996)  The 1-to-1 future: building business 
relationships one customer at a time  . London: Piatkus; Peppers, D. and 
Rogers, M. (1998) Enterprise 1-to-1 . London: Piatkus; Peppers, D. and 
Rogers, M. (1999) The 1-to-1 ﬁ eldbook . London: Piatkus; Peppers, D. 
and Rogers, M. (2000) The 1-to-1 manager . London: Piatkus; Peppers, 
D. and Rogers, M. (2001) One-to-one B2B: CRM strategies for the 
real economy  . London: Piatkus; Peppers, D. and Rogers, M. (2004) 
Managing customer relationships: a strategic framework  . Hoboken, NJ: 
John Wiley  &  Sons; Peppers, D. and Rogers, M. (2005)  Return on 
customer: creating maximum value from your scarcest resource  . New 
York: Doubleday. 
      19.          http://qci.co.uk/public_face/;  Woodcock, N., Stone, M. and Foss, B. 
(2002) The Customer Management Scorecard . London: Kogan Page. 
      20.          Buttle ,    F.             ( 2004 )        Customer relationship management: concepts and tools             .  
 Oxford :       Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann              .  
      21.         Payne, A. (2005)  Handbook of CRM: achieving excellence through 
customer management  . Oxford: Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann; 
Payne, A. and Frow, P . (2005) A strategic framework for customer 
relationship management.  Journal of Marketing  , Vol. 69, October, 
pp. 167–176. 
 22.  Payne , A. (2005)  Handbook of CRM: achieving excellence through 
customer management . Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann. 

===== PAGE 47 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 48 =====
 
                     Understanding 
relationships  
 Chapter 2 

===== PAGE 49 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 50 =====
 
           Chapter objectives      
   By the end of this chapter, you will understand: 
    1.   how to recognize a relationship  
    2.   attributes of successful relationships  
    3.   the importance of trust and commitment within a relationship  
    4.   why companies and customers are sometimes motivated to establish and maintain 
relationships with each other, and sometimes not  
    5.   the meaning and importance of customer lifetime value  
    6.   the ﬁ ve different schools of thought that contribute to our understanding of 
relationships and relationship management.         
    What is a relationship? 
   The  ‘ R ’  of CRM stands for  ‘ relationship ’ . But what do we really mean 
by the expression  ‘ relationship? ’  Certainly, most of us would understand 
what it means to be in a personal relationship, but what is a relationship 
between a customer and supplier? 
  At the very least a relationship involves interaction over time. If 
there is only a one-off transaction, like buying a vacuum cleaner from a 
specialist outlet, most of us wouldn’t call this a relationship. Thinking in 
terms of a dyadic relationship, that is a relationship between two parties, 
if we take this interaction over time as a critical feature, we can deﬁ  ne 
the term ‘ relationship ’  as follows: 
 A relationship is composed of a series of interactive episodes between 
dyadic parties over time. 
  Let’s be clear about what is meant by  ‘ interactive episode ’ . Episodes are 
time bound (they have a beginning and an end) and are nameable. Within 
a sales representative–customer relationship it is often possible to identify 
a number of discrete episodes, such as making a purchase, enquiring 
about a product, making a sales call, negotiating terms, dealing with a 
complaint, resolving an invoicing dispute and playing a round of golf. 
   Each episode in turn is composed of a series of interactions. Interaction 
consists of action and response to that action. Within each episode, each 
participant will act towards, and interact with, the other. The content of 
each episode is a range of communicative behaviours including speech, 
deeds (actions) and body language. 
   Some authorities think that it is insufﬁ cient, even naïve, to deﬁ  ne a 
relationship as interaction over time. Jim Barnes, for example, suggests 
that there needs to be some emotional content to the interaction. 
1   This 
implies some type of affective connection, attachment or bond. 

===== PAGE 51 =====
 
28 Customer Relationship Management
   Similarly, a relationship has been said to exist only when the parties 
move from a state of independence to dependence or interdependence.  2
When a customer buys an occasional latte from a coffee shop, this is a 
transaction not a relationship. If the customer returns repeatedly because 
she likes the store’s atmosphere, the way the coffee is prepared or has 
taken a shine to the barista, this looks more like a relationship. And 
while, in this instance, there is dependence (of the customer on the coffee 
shop) there is no interdependence. 
  This suggests the parties within the dyad may have very different ideas 
about whether they are in a relationship. For example, in a professional 
procurement context for a multinational organization, corporate buying 
staff may think they are being tough and transactional. Their suppliers 
may feel that they have built a relationship. 
   We can conclude from this that a relationship is a social construct. 
That is to say, a relationship exists if people believe that a relationship 
exists and they act accordingly. It is also apparent that relationships can 
be unilateral or reciprocal; either one or both of the parties may believe 
they are in a relationship. 
    Change within relationships 
   Relationships change over time. Parties become closer or more distant; 
interactions become more or less frequent. Because they evolve, they can 
vary considerably, both in the number and variety of episodes, and the 
interactions that take place within those episodes. Dwyer has identiﬁ  ed 
ﬁ ve general phases through which customer–supplier relationships can 
evolve.
3
    1.     awareness 
    2.     exploration  
    3.     expansion  
    4.     commitment  
    5.     dissolution.    
  Awareness is when each party comes to the attention of the other as a 
possible exchange partner. Exploration is the period of investigation and 
testing during which the parties explore each others ’  capabilities and 
performance. Some trial purchasing takes place. If the trial is unsuccessful 
the relationship can be terminated with few costs. The exploration phase 
is thought to comprise ﬁ  ve subprocesses: attraction, communication 
and bargaining, development and exercise of power, development of 
norms, and development of expectations. Expansion is the phase in 
which there is increasing interdependence. More transactions take place 
and trust begins to develop. The commitment phase is characterized 
by increased adaptation and mutually understood roles and goals. 
Purchasing processes that have become automated are a sure sign of 
commitment.
   Not all relationships reach the commitment phase. Many are 
terminated before that stage. There may be a breach of trust that forces 
a partner to reconsider the relationship. Perhaps the requirements of 

===== PAGE 52 =====
 
Understanding relationships 29
the customer change and the supplier is no longer needed. Relationship 
termination can be bilateral or unilateral. Bilateral termination is when 
both parties agree to end the relationship. They will probably want to 
retrieve whatever assets they invested in the relationship. Unilateral 
termination is when one of the parties moves to end the relationship. 
Customers may exit relationships for many reasons, such as repeated 
service failures or changed product requirements. Suppliers may choose 
to exit relationships because of their failure to contribute to sales volume 
or proﬁ t goals. One option to resolve the problem and continue the 
relationship may be to reduce cost-to-serve. 
   This model of relationship development highlights two attributes of 
highly developed relationships: trust and commitment. These attributes 
have been the subject of a considerable amount of research.  
4
    Trust 
   Trust is focused. That is, although there may be a generalized sense of 
conﬁ dence and security, these feelings are directed. One party may trust 
the other party’s: 
●       benevolence : a belief that one party acts in the interests of the other  
●       honesty : a belief that the other party’s word is reliable or credible  
●       competence : a belief that the other party has the necessary expertise 
to perform as required. 
   The development of trust is an investment in relationship building which 
has a long-term payoff. Trust emerges as parties share experiences, and 
interpret and assess each other’s motives. As they learn more about 
each other, risk and doubt are reduced. For these reasons, trust has been 
described as the glue that holds a relationship together across time and 
experience.
5
   When mutual trust exists between partners, both are motivated to 
make investments in the relationship. These investments, which serve 
as exit barriers, may be either tangible (e.g. property) or intangible (e.g. 
knowledge). Such investments may or may not be retrievable when the 
relationship dissolves. 
   If trust is absent, conﬂ  ict and uncertainty rise, while cooperation 
falls. Lack of trust clearly provides a shaky foundation for a successful 
customer-supplier relationship. 
   It has been suggested that as relationships evolve over time so does 
the character of trust:  
6
●       calculus-based trust : this is present in the early stages of a relationship 
and is quite calculative. It is as if one party says:  ‘ I trust you because 
of what I am gaining or expect to gain from the relationship ’ . The 
outcomes of creating and maintaining the new relationship are 
weighed against those of dissolving it.  
●       knowledge-based trust : this relies on the individual parties ’  interactive 
history and knowledge of each other, allowing each to make accurate 
predictions about how the other will act. 

===== PAGE 53 =====
 
30 Customer Relationship Management
●       identiﬁ cation-based trust : this happens when mutual understanding 
is so deep that each can act as substitute for the other in interpersonal 
interaction. This is found in the later stages of relationship development.     
    Commitment 
   Commitment is an essential ingredient for successful, long-term, relation-
ships. Morgan and Hunt deﬁ ne relationship commitment as follows: 
 Commitment is shown by  ‘ an exchange partner believing that an 
ongoing relationship with another is so important as to warrant 
maximum effort to maintain it; that is, the committed party believes 
the relationship is worth working on to ensure that it endures 
indeﬁ nitely ’ .   
7
   Commitment arises from trust, shared values, and the belief that partners 
will be difﬁ cult to replace. Commitment motivates partners to cooperate 
in order to preserve relationship investments. Commitment means 
partners eschew short-term alternatives in favour of more stable, long-
term beneﬁ ts associated with current partners. Where customers have 
choice, they make commitments only to trustworthy partners, because 
commitment entails vulnerability, leaving them open to opportunism. 
For example, a corporate customer committed to future purchasing of 
raw materials from a particular supplier may experience the downside 
of opportunistic behaviour if the supplier raises prices. 
  Evidence of commitment is found in the investments that one party 
makes in the other. One party makes investments in the promising 
relationship and if the other responds, the relationship evolves and the 
partners become increasingly committed to doing business with each 
other. Investments can include time, money and the sidelining of current 
or alternative relationships. A partner’s commitment to a relationship is 
directly represented in the size of the investment in the relationship, since 
this represents termination costs. Highly committed relationships have 
very high termination costs, since some of these relationship investments 
may be irretrievable. In addition, there may be signiﬁ cant costs incurred 
in switching to an alternative supplier, such as search costs, learning costs 
and psychic costs. 
    Relationship quality 
  This discussion of trust and commitment suggests that some relationships 
can be thought to be of better quality than others. Research into 
relationship quality generally cites trust and commitment as core 
attributes of a high quality relationship.  8   However, a number of other 
attributes have also been identiﬁ  ed, including relationship satisfaction, 
mutual goals and cooperative norms. 
   Relationship satisfaction is not the same as commitment. Commitment 
to a supplier comes as investments are made in the relationship, and 
investments are only made if the committed party is satisﬁ  ed with 

===== PAGE 54 =====
 
Understanding relationships 31
their transactional history. In other words, investments are made in 
relationships which are satisfactory.  9   Mutual goals are present when the 
parties share objectives that can only be achieved through joint action 
and relationship continuity. Cooperative norms are seen when relational 
parties work together constructively and interdependently to resolve 
problems. 
   Given that CRM implementations are often designed to build closer, 
more value-laden relationships with customers, it makes sense for 
managers to be aware of the quality of the relationships they have with 
customers.
    Why companies want 
relationships with 
customers
   The fundamental reason for companies wanting to build relationships 
with customers is economic. Companies generate better results when 
they manage their customer base in order to identify, acquire, satisfy 
and retain proﬁ table customers. These are key objectives of many CRM 
strategies.
   Improving customer retention rates has the effect of increasing the size 
of the customer base. Figure 2.1    compares two companies. Company 
A has a churn rate (customer defection rate) of 5 per cent per annum; 
company B’s churn rate is 10 per cent. Put another way, their respective 
customer retention rates are 95 and 90 per cent. Starting from the same 
position and acquiring an identical number of new customers each year, 
company A’s customer base is 19 per cent larger than company B’s after 
four years: 1268 customers compared with 1066 customers. 
   Churn rates vary considerably. The energy utilities used to enjoy very 
low churn levels because of their monopoly positions. However, after 
Company A (5% churn)
Existing
customers 
New
customers 
Total
customer
base
Existing
customers
New
customers
Total
customer
base
2001
Year
1000
2002 1045
2003 1088
2004 1129
2005 1168
100 1100
100 1145
100 1188
100 1229 973 100 1073 
100 1268 966 100 1066 
Company B (10% churn) 
1000 100 1100 
990 100 1090 
981 100 1081
 Figure 2.1 
      The effect of 
customer retention 
on customer 
numbers    

===== PAGE 55 =====
 
32 Customer Relationship Management
industry deregulation in the UK, about 25 per cent of utility customers 
changed suppliers within the ﬁ  rst 24 months. The industry had been 
expecting 5–10 per cent churn, and were surprised at the actual levels. 
Most switchers were looking for better prices and to achieve a dual-fuel 
(gas and electricity) discount.
       Case 2.1   
  Consequences of customer churn at Sprint Nextel      
   Sprint Nextel, the third largest wireless telecommunications ﬁ rm in the USA, is downsizing 
its workforce by 4000 jobs and closing 125 stores in the ﬁ rst half of 2008. The moves are part 
of cost-saving measures prompted by anticipated decreases in the ﬁ  rm’s subscriber base, 
revenues and proﬁ tability in the fourth quarter of 2007. The ﬁ rm expects to save $700 to $800 
million annually by cutting the jobs. 
   Sprint Nextel lost 190 000 subscribers and 683 000  ‘ post-paid ’  customers during the fourth 
quarter of 2007. The subscriber losses are being attributed to a slowdown in the growth of 
wireless subscriptions in the USA, and continuing customer defection to larger rivals AT & T 
Mobile and Verizon Wireless since Sprint bought Nextel Communications for $36 billion in 
2005. The ﬁ rm is also struggling with service quality problems. 
   On this news, shares of Sprint Nextel fell to their lowest price since October 2002. 
   Source:  http://www.allheadlinenews.com   10
   There is little merit in growing the customer base aimlessly. The goal 
must be to retain existing customers and recruit new customers that have 
future proﬁ t potential or are important for other strategic purposes. 11
Not all customers are of equal importance. Some customers may not be 
worth recruiting or retaining at all, for example those who have a high 
cost-to-serve, are debtors, late payers or promiscuous in the sense that 
they switch frequently between suppliers. 
  Other things being equal, a larger customer base does deliver better 
business performance. Similarly, as customer retention rates rise (or 
defection rates fall), so does the average tenure of a customer, as shown 
in Figure 2.2   . Tenure is the term used to describe the length of time a 
customer remains a customer. The impacts of small improvements in 
customer retention are hugely magniﬁ ed at higher levels of retention. For 
example, improving the customer retention rate from 75 to 80 per cent 
grows average customer tenure from 10 to 12.5 years. Managing tenure 
by reducing defection rates can be critical. For example, it can take 13 
years for utility customers to break even by recovering the costs of their 
initial recruitment. 
   Managing customer retention and tenure intelligently generates two 
key beneﬁ ts for companies; reduced marketing costs and better customer 
insight.

===== PAGE 56 =====
 
Understanding relationships 33
    Reduced marketing costs 
   Improving customer retention reduces a company’s marketing costs. 
Fewer dollars need to be spent replacing churned customers. 12   For 
example, it has been estimated that it costs an advertising agency at 
least 20 times as much to recruit a new client than it does to retain an 
existing client. Major agencies can spend up to $4 million on research, 
strategic analysis and creative work in pitching for one major client, 
with up to four creative teams working on different executions. An 
agency might incur these costs several times over as it pitches to several 
prospective clients to replace a lost client. 
13   In addition to reducing the 
costs of customer acquisition, cost-to-serve existing customers also tends 
to fall over time. Ultimately, as in some business-to-business markets, 
the relationship may become fully automated. Some supply-chain 
relationships, for example, employ electronic data interchange (EDI) that 
fully automates the ordering, inventory and invoicing processes. EDI is 
a relationship investment that acts as an exit barrier.  
    Better customer insight 
  As customer tenure lengthens, suppliers are able to develop a better 
understanding of customer requirements and expectations. Customers 
also come to understand what a supplier can do for them. Consequently, 
suppliers become better placed to identify and satisfy customer 
requirements proﬁ tably, selling more product and service to the retained 
customer. Over time, as relationships deepen, trust and commitment 
between the parties is likely to grow. Under these circumstances, revenue 
and proﬁ t streams from customers become more secure. One study, for 
example, shows that the average online clothing customer spends 67 per 
cent more, and grocery customers spend 23 per cent more, in months 31–36 
of a relationship than they spend in months 0–6. 
14   In sum, both the cost and 
revenue sides of the proﬁ t equation are impacted by customer retention. 
Customer retention rate (%)
50
67
75
80
90
92
95
96
97
98
99
2 years
3 years
4 years
5 years
10 years
12.5 years
20 years
25 years
33.3 years
50 years
100 years
Average customer tenure 
 Figure 2.2 
      Retention rate and 
average customer 
tenure    

===== PAGE 57 =====
 
34 Customer Relationship Management
   Some companies employ a model that has been variously known as 
a value ladder 15   or value staircase  16   to help them understand where 
customers are positioned in terms of their tenure with the company. 
Customers typically buy from a portfolio of more or less equivalent 
offers or suppliers. For example, large and medium-sized businesses 
often do business with more than one bank, and consumers may select 
a soft drink from a small portfolio of branded carbonated beverages. 
When customers climb the ladder, their value to your company grows. 
Your share of their portfolio expands. Put another way, your share of 
customer spending, or customer wallet, grows. In  Table 2.1    we present a 
seven-stage customer journey from suspect status to advocate status. 
    Suspect   Does the potential customer ﬁ  t your target market proﬁ  le? 
    Prospect   The customer ﬁ  ts the target market proﬁ  le and is being approached for the 
ﬁ  rst time. 
    First-time customer   The customer makes a ﬁ  rst purchase. 
    Repeat customer   The customer makes additional purchases. Your offer plays a minor role in the 
customer’s portfolio. 
    Majority customer   The customer selects your company as supplier of choice. You occupy a 
signiﬁ  cant place in the customer’s portfolio. 
    Loyal customer   The customer is resistant to switching suppliers and has a strong positive 
attitude to your company or offer. 
    Advocate   The customer generates additional referral dollars through positive word-
of-mouth. 
Table 2.1        The 
customer journey  
  As in the Dwyer model cited earlier, not every customer progresses 
uniformly along the path from  ‘ never-a-customer ’  to  ‘ always-a-customer ’ . 
Some will have a long maturity phase (i.e. loyal customer); others will 
have a shorter life, perhaps never shifting from ﬁ  rst-time customer to 
repeat customer; others still might never convert from prospect to ﬁ  rst-
timer. CRM software allows companies to trace where customers are on 
this pathway and to allocate resources intelligently to advance suitable 
customers along the value trajectory. 
   Costs and revenues vary from stage to stage of the journey. In the early 
stages, a company may invest signiﬁ cant sums in converting a prospect 
into a ﬁ  rst-time customer. The investment in initiating a relationship 
may not be recovered for some time. For example, Reichheld and Sasser 
have shown that it takes a credit-card company approaching two years 
to recover the costs of customer acquisition. 
17   Another study shows that 
the average online clothing customer takes four purchases (12 months) 
to recover the costs of their acquisition, whereas grocery customers 
take 18 months to break even. 18   In later years, the transactions within 
the relationship may become highly routinized and very low cost to 
complete, because each party knows and trusts the other.  

===== PAGE 58 =====
 
Understanding relationships 35
    Lifetime value 
   This leads to the core CRM idea that a customer should not be viewed as 
a set of independent transactions, but as a lifetime income stream. In the 
automobile industry, for example, it is estimated that a General Motors 
retail customer is worth $276 000 over a lifetime of purchasing cars (11 or 
more vehicles), parts and service. Fleet operators are worth considerably 
more.  
19   When a GM customer switches to Ford, the revenue streams 
from that customer may be lost for ever. This makes customer retention 
a strategically important goal for GM.
       Case 2.2   
  Customer lifetime value (CLV) in the banking industry      
   One in ﬁ ve banking executives does not measure CLV . Couple this with the 22 per cent who 
do not measure portfolio or wallet share, and it is easy to see why cross-selling is such a 
challenge for ﬁ  nancial service providers. Unless a banker knows which of a customer’s 
ﬁ nancial needs are being met, it is exceedingly difﬁ  cult to suggest additional services. A 
robust business intelligence system can provide a ﬁ  nancial services ﬁ rm with a 360 degree 
view of the customer. Transactions can be consolidated with demographic and psychographic 
data, revenue and proﬁ t measures, as well as with historical customer service incidents and 
queries. With this total picture, the provider can see the customer from multiple perspectives 
and craft programmes that will satisfy a broader range of client requirements. Part of this 
multifaceted view of the customer is the ability to aggregate multiple customers into a 
household perspective. The beneﬁ ts of this consolidated view are clear and strong. Multiple 
ﬁ nancial service needs can be seen in total, investment opportunities can be tied to life 
events for cohabiting family members and marketing costs can be driven down by providing 
a single, comprehensive marketing message. 
   Source: IBM  20
   Lifetime value (LTV), which is also known as customer lifetime value 
(CLV), is a measure of a customer’s, or customer segment’s, proﬁ  t-
generation for a company. LTV can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 Lifetime value is the present day value of all net margins earned 
from a relationship with a customer, customer segment or cohort. 
  LTV can be estimated at the level of the individual customer, customer 
segment or cohort. A cohort of customers is a group that has some 
characteristic or set of characteristics in common. These might be 
customers recruited in a single year or recruited though a single campaign 
or channel. This type of analysis is useful, for example, to ﬁ nd out whether 
certain channels are more effective or more efﬁ  cient at recruiting high 
value customers. A European motoring organization knows that it costs 
an average of $105 to recruit a new member. However, recruitment costs 
vary across channels. The organization’s member-get-member (MGM) 
referral scheme costs $66, the organization’s direct response TV campaign 
costs $300, and door drops cost $210 per newly acquired member. The 

===== PAGE 59 =====
 
36 Customer Relationship Management
MGM scheme is most cost-effective at customer acquisition, but if these 
customers churn at a high rate and cost signiﬁ cantly more to serve, they 
may in fact be less valuable than customers generated at higher initial 
cost. In fact, customers acquired through the MGM referral scheme remain 
members longer, buy more and also generate word-of-mouth referrals. 
  To compute LTV , all historic net margins are compounded up to today’s 
value and all future net margins are discounted back to today’s value. 
Estimates of LTV potential look only to the future and ignore the past. 
   The focus on net margins rather than gross margins is because a 
customer that appears to be valuable on the basis of the gross margins 
generated might seem less proﬁ  table once cost-to-serve the customer is 
taken into account. Companies that do not have the processes in place to 
allocate costs to customers cannot use net margin data. They must work 
either with gross margin or sales revenue data. 
   For most companies, an important strategic objective is to identify and 
attract those customers or segments that have the highest LTV potential. 
They are unconcerned with the past. What matters is the future. 
   Research by Reichheld and Sasser indicates why it is important to look 
forward to compute LTV . 
21   Their data suggest that proﬁ t margins tend to 
accelerate over time, as shown in  Figure 2.3   . This has four causes. 
    1 .       Revenues grow   over time as customers buy more. In the credit-
card example in  Figure 2.3 , users tend to grow their balances over 
time as they become more relaxed about using their card for an 
increasing range of purchases. Also, a satisﬁ  ed customer may look 
to buy additional categories of product from a preferred supplier. An 
insurance company that has a loyal car insurance customer is likely 
to experience some success cross-selling other personal lines, for 
example home, property and travel insurance.  
Profit (loss) per customer over time ($)
Service
222192166144
543210 
30
45
25
42
99
35
44
121
70
49
144
88
55
256
168
88
Credit card
Industrial laundry
Industrial distribution
(51)
Auto servicing
Year
 Figure 2.3 
      Proﬁ t from 
customers over time    
   2 .       Cost-to-serve is lower  for existing customers, because both supplier and 
customer understand each other. For example, customers do not make 
demands on the company that it cannot satisfy. Similarly companies do 
not communicate offers that have little or no value to customers. 

===== PAGE 60 =====
 
Understanding relationships 37
    3 .       Referrals are generated   by existing, satisﬁ  ed customers through 
their unpaid advocacy. Lexus UK, for example, believes that every 
delighted customer generates £600 000 of referral business. Word-of-
mouth is recognized as powerfully persuasive because it is regarded 
as being independent and unpaid.  
    4 .       Higher prices are paid  by existing customers than those paid by new 
customers. This is partly because they are not offered the discounts 
that are often employed to win new customers, and partly because 
they are less sensitive to price offers from other potential suppliers 
because they are satisﬁ ed with their experience. 
    Computing LTV 
   The computation of LTV potential is, in principle, very straightforward. 
Several pieces of information are required. For an existing customer, you 
need to know: 
    1.     what is the probability that the customer will buy products and 
services from the company in the future, period-by-period?  
    2.     what will the gross margins on those purchases be, period-by-period?  
    3.     what will the cost of serving the customer be, period-by-period? 
   For new customers an additional piece of information is needed: 
    4.     what is the cost of acquiring the customer? 
   Finally, to bring future margins back to today’s value, another question 
needs to be answered for both existing and new customers: 
    5.     what discount rate should be applied to future net margins? 
   Some commentators suggest that LTV estimates should not be based 
only on future purchasing, but also on word-of-mouth (WOM) inﬂ uence. 
The logic is that a satisﬁ ed and retained customer not only buys, but also 
inﬂ uences others to buy. Lee and colleagues show that incorporation of 
WOM effects increases LTV estimates signiﬁ cantly. 
22
    Figure 2.4    demonstrates the impact that discount rate has on customer 
value. Without discounting future proﬁ ts, the customer appears to have 
an LTV of $235. However, once a 15 per cent discount rate is applied, the 
customer’s LTV in today’s dollar is only $127.43. A common practice is to 
use the weighted average cost of capital (WACC) as the discount factor. 
WACC takes into account the costs of the two sources of capital: debt 
and equity. Each usually has a different cost, and therefore the average 
cost of capital for a business will reﬂ  ect the degree to which the business 
is funded by the two sources. 
   Computation of a meaningful LTV estimate requires companies to be 
able to forecast customer buying behaviour, product and service costs 
and prices, the costs of capital (for determining the discount rate) and 
the costs of acquiring and retaining customers. This is very demanding, 
especially at the level of the individual customer, but it is a challenge 
that analytical CRM implementations often address. 
  A number of companies have developed models that produce 
approximate LTV estimates. US Bancorp, for example, calculates a 

===== PAGE 61 =====
 
38 Customer Relationship Management
customer proﬁ tability metric called customer relationship value (CRV) 
in which they use historical product ownership to generate  ‘ propensity 
to buy ’  indices. Overhead costs are not factored into the computation. 
Within their customer base, they have been able to identify four CRV 
segments, each having different value, cost, attrition and risk proﬁ les: 
●      top tier, 11% of customers 
●      threshold, next 22% 
●      fence sitters, next 39% 
●      value destroyers, bottom 28%. 
   Each of these segments is treated to different value propositions and 
customer management programmes: product offers, lending decisions, 
fee waivers, channel options and retention efforts. For situations where 
the cost of generating accurate LTV data is thought not to be prohibitive, 
Berger and Nasr have developed a number of mathematical models that 
can be used in LTV estimation.  
23
1. Undiscounted profit earned
 over 5-years:
2. Discounted profit earned over 5-years 
 (15% discount rate)
Year 0 –$50 Year 0 –$50.00
 03$+1$30+1 ÷ 1.15 = $26.09
 04$+2$40+2 ÷ 1.15
2 = $30.25
 55$+355$+3 ÷ 1.15 3 = $36.16
 27$+427$+4 ÷ 1.15 4 = $41.17
 88$+588$+5 ÷ 1.15 5 = $43.76
34.721$532$
The net present value of 5-years profit
earned from this customer is $127.43 Figure 2.4 
      Impact of discount 
rate on lifetime 
value    
       Case 2.3   
  High lifetime value (LTV) customers at Barclays Bank      
   Barclays is a leading UK-based bank with global operations. As part of the bank’s CRM 
strategy, it undertook customer portfolio analysis to identify which retail segments were 
most strategically signiﬁ cant. The analysis found that customers within the 25–35 year age 
group, who were professionally employed, who had a mortgage and/or credit-card product 
were most strategically signiﬁ cant. These were the bank’s most proﬁ table customers. 
   The bank also found that this segment represented the highest potential lifetime value (LTV) 
for the bank, 12 per cent greater than any other segment. LTV is derived from the bank’s 
estimates of future income from fees, interest and other charges over their lifetime as a 
customer. 

===== PAGE 62 =====
 
Understanding relationships 39
    Figure 2.5    shows how to compute LTV for a cohort of customers. 
In year 0, the company spent $10 million in marketing campaigns to 
generate new customers. The result was 100 000 new customers added 
to the customer base at an acquisition cost of $100 per customer. 
Year
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
$
Profit per
customer
/H11002100
50
70
100
140
190
250
320
400
450
500
$
net present
value at 15%
discount
43.48
52.93
65.75
80.00
94.53
108.23
120.30
127.84
130.72
123.15
Customer
retention rate (%)
60
70
75
80
85
90
92
94
95
96
No. of
customers
100 000
60 000
42 000
31 500
25 200
21 420
19 278
17 736
16 672
15 838
15 204
$
Total annual
profit
/H1100210 000 000
2 608 800
2 223 062
2 071 125
2 024 776
2 016 000
2 086 364
2 133 654
2 179 346
2 024 744
1 872 372
 Figure 2.5 
      Computing cohort 
value    
   In year 1 the company lost 40 per cent of these new customers, but the 
remaining 60 per cent each generated $50 contribution to proﬁ t. If this is 
discounted at 15 per cent, in year 0’s currency each retained customer’s 
proﬁ t contribution is $43.48. In year 2, the retention rate rises from 60 to 
70 per cent, and each of the remaining customers contributes $70 ($52.93 
at discounted rate) to proﬁ  t. You can see from the right hand column 
in Figure 2.5  that it takes nearly ﬁ  ve years to recover the investment 
of acquiring this cohort. The data demonstrate two well-established 
phenomena. First, proﬁ t per customer rises over time, for reasons set out 
earlier in this chapter. Secondly, customer retention rate rises over time. 
It is feasible to use data such as these to manage a business for improved 
proﬁ tability. Several strategies are available: 
    1.     Improve customer retention rate in the early years of the relationship. 
This will produce a larger number of customers to generate higher 
proﬁ ts in the later years.  
    2.     Increase the proﬁ t earned per customer by: 
     a.     reducing cost-to-serve 
     b.     cross-selling or up-selling additional products and services. 
    3.     Become better at customer acquisition by: 
     a.     using more cost effective recruitment channels 
     b.      better qualiﬁ cation of prospects. Customers who defect early on 
perhaps should not have been recruited in the ﬁ rst place. 

===== PAGE 63 =====
 
40 Customer Relationship Management
   Don’t leave this discussion of LTV by believing that if you improve 
customer retention business performance will automatically improve. It 
depends entirely on which customers are retained and how you manage 
those relationships. 
    Why companies do NOT 
want relationships with 
customers
   Despite the ﬁ nancial beneﬁ  ts that can accrue from a relationship, 
companies sometimes resist entering into relationships with customers. 
In the business-to-business (B2B) context there are a number of reasons 
for this resistance. 
Loss of control  : a mature relationship involves give and take on both 
sides of the dyad. In bilateral relationships, suppliers may have to give 
up unilateral control over their own business’s resources. For example, 
a supplier of engineering services might not want to provide free pre-
sales consultancy for a new project with an established client because 
of the high costs involved. However, the relationship partner might 
have clear expectations of what activities should be performed and 
what resources deployed by both themselves and the other party.  
Exit costs  : not all relationships survive. It is not necessarily easy or 
cost-effective to exit a relationship. Sometimes, investments that 
are made in a relationship are not returned when a relationship 
breaks down. Relationship investments vary from the insigniﬁ  cant 
(e.g. co-branding of promotional literature) to highly signiﬁ  cant 
(e.g. setting up a new production line to service a particular customer’s 
requirements). A company might justiﬁ  ably be concerned about the 
security of a relationship-based investment in new manufacturing 
operations.
Resource commitment  : relationships require the commitment of 
resources such as people, time and money. Companies have to decide 
whether it is better to allocate resources to customer management or 
some other area of the business, such as operations or research and 
development. Once resources are committed, they can become sunk 
costs. Sunk costs are unrecoverable past expenditures. These would not 
normally be taken into account when deciding whether to continue in a 
relationship, because they cannot be recovered whether the relationship 
endures or not. However, it is a common instinct to consider them. 
Opportunity costs  : if resources are committed to one customer, they 
cannot be allocated to another. Relationships carry with them high 
opportunity costs. If you commit resources to customer A, you may 
have to give up the possibility of a relationship with customer B, even 
if that does seem to be a better proposition. An engineering consultancy 
that commits consultants to pre-sales activities with a current client 

===== PAGE 64 =====
 
Understanding relationships 41
might incur the opportunity cost of losing more lucrative work 
generating new business opportunities from other prospective clients. 
    Why customers want 
relationships with suppliers 
    B2B context 
   There are a number of circumstances when a B2B customer might want a 
long-term relationship with a supplier: 
Product complexity  : if the product or its applications are complex, for 
example, networking infrastructure.  
Product strategic signiﬁ cance : if the product is strategically important 
or mission-critical, for example, supply of essential raw materials for a 
continuous process manufacturer.  
Service requirements  : if there are down-stream service requirements, 
for example, for machine tools.  
Financial risk : if ﬁ nancial risk is high, for example, in buying large items 
of capital equipment.  
Reciprocity : a ﬁ nancial audit practice may want a close relationship with 
a management consultancy, so that each party beneﬁ  ts from referrals 
by the other. 
    B2C context 
   In a business-to-consumer (B2C) context, relationships may be valued 
when the customer experiences beneﬁ  ts over and above those directly 
derived from acquiring, consuming or using the product or service. For 
example:
Recognition : customers may feel more valued when recognized and 
addressed by name, for example at a retail bank branch, or as a 
frequent ﬂ yer.  
Personalization : products or services can be customized. For example, 
over time, a hairdresser may come to understand a customer’s 
particular preferences or expectations.  
Power : relationships with suppliers can be empowering. For example, 
some of the usual power asymmetry in relationships between banks 
and their customers may be reversed when customers feel that they 
have personal relationships with particular bank ofﬁ cers or branches.  
Risk reduction  : risk takes many forms – performance, physical, 
ﬁ nancial, social and psychological. High levels of perceived risk are 
uncomfortable for many customers. A relationship can reduce or 
even, perhaps, eliminate perceived risk. For example, a customer may 
develop a relationship with a service station to reduce the perceived 
performance and physical risk attached to having a car serviced. The 

===== PAGE 65 =====
 
42 Customer Relationship Management
relationship provides the assurance that the job has been skilfully 
performed and that the car is safe to drive.  
Status : customers may feel that their status is enhanced by a relationship 
with a supplier, such as an elite health club or a company offering a 
platinum credit-card.  
Afﬁ liation : people’s social needs can be met through commercially based, 
or non-commercially based, relationships. Many people are customers 
(members) of professional or community associations, for example. 
   Customer segments can vary in their desire to have relationships with 
suppliers. For example, large corporations have their own treasury 
departments and often get little value from a bank relationship; small 
private account holders have no need for the additional services that a 
relationship provides; small and medium-sized business and high net 
worth individuals may have most to gain from a closer relationship with 
a bank. 
  A number of B2C organizations deliver incremental beneﬁ ts by building 
closer relationships with their customers. Casa Buitoni, for example, offers 
customers the opportunity to learn more about Italian cuisine through 
an online customer club. The Harley Owners Group (HOG) offers a 
raft of beneﬁ ts to Harley Davidson owners, including club outings and 
preferential insurance rates. Nestlé’s mother and baby club offers advice 
and information to new mothers. 
    Why customers do NOT 
want relationships with 
suppliers
  While companies generally want long-term relationships with customers 
for the economic reasons described above, it is far less clear that customers 
universally want relationships with their suppliers. B2B customers cite a 
number of concerns. 24
Fear of dependency : this is driven by a number of worries. Customers may 
be concerned that the supplier might act opportunistically, once they are 
in a preferred position, perhaps introducing price rises. They may also 
fear the reduction in their ﬂ  exibility to choose alternative suppliers. 
There may also be concerns over a loss of personal authority and control.  
Lack of perceived value in the relationship  : customers may not believe 
that they will enjoy substantial savings in transaction costs, or that 
the relationship will help them create a superior competitive position, 
generate additional revenue or that there will be any social beneﬁ  ts. 
In other words, there is no perceived value above and beyond that 
obtained from the product or service.  
Lack of conﬁ dence in the supplier  : customers may choose not to enter 
a relationship because they feel the potential partner is unreliable, 

===== PAGE 66 =====
 
Understanding relationships 43
too small, strategically insigniﬁ  cant, has a poor reputation or is 
insufﬁ ciently innovative. 
Customer lacks relational orientation  : not all company cultures are 
equally inclined towards relationship building. Some are much more 
transactional. For example, some retailers make it a policy to buy 
a high proportion of their merchandise through special offers. The 
preference for transactional rather than relational business operations 
may be reﬂ ected in a company’s buying processes and reward systems.  
Rapid technological changes  : in an industry with rapidly changing 
technology, commitment to one supplier might mean that the customer 
misses out on new developments available through other suppliers. 
   In the B2C context, consumers buy hundreds of different convenience, 
shopping and speciality products and services. Whereas consumers 
might want a relationship with their ﬁ  nancial service advisor or their 
physician, they can often ﬁ  nd no good reason for developing closer 
relationships with the manufacturer of their household detergent, snack 
foods or toothpaste. However, for consumer products and services that 
are personally important, customers can become more involved and 
become more emotionally engaged.  
    Customer satisfaction, 
loyalty and business 
performance
  An important rationale for CRM is that it improves business performance 
by enhancing customer satisfaction and driving up customer loyalty, as 
shown in  Figure 2.6   . There is a compelling logic to the model, which has 
been dubbed the ‘ satisfaction–proﬁ t chain ’ .25   Satisfaction increases because 
customer insight allows companies to understand their customers better, 
Customer
loyalty
Business
performance
Customer
satisfaction
Understand customer
requirements
Meet customer 
expectations
Deliver customer value
Behavioural loyalty
Attitudinal loyalty
Revenue growth
Share of customer
Customer tenure
 Figure 2.6 
      The satisfaction–
proﬁ t chain    

===== PAGE 67 =====
 
44 Customer Relationship Management
and create improved customer value propositions and better customer 
experiences. As customer satisfaction rises, so does customer intention to 
repurchase. 
26   This in turn inﬂ  uences actual purchasing behaviour, which 
has an impact on business performance. 
   We’ll examine the variables and linkages between them. First we’ll 
deﬁ ne the major variables of customer satisfaction, customer loyalty and 
business performance. 
    Customer satisfaction 
   Customer satisfaction has been the subject of considerable research, and 
has been deﬁ  ned and measured in many ways. 
27   We deﬁ ne customer 
satisfaction as follows: 
   Customer satisfaction is the customer’s fulﬁ  lment response to a 
customer experience, or some part thereof. 
   Customer satisfaction is a pleasurable fulﬁ lment response. Dissatisfaction 
is an unpleasurable fulﬁ  lment response. The  ‘ experience, or some part 
thereof ’  component of the deﬁ  nition suggests that the satisfaction 
evaluation can be directed at any or all elements of the customer’s 
experience. This can include product, service, process and any other 
components of the customer experience. 
  The most common way of quantifying satisfaction is to compare the 
customer’s perception of an experience, or some part of it, with their 
expectations. This is known as the expectations–disconﬁ  rmation model 
of customer satisfaction. This model suggests that if customers perceive 
their expectations to be met, they are satisﬁ  ed. If their expectations are 
underperformed, this is negative disconﬁ  rmation and they will be 
dissatisﬁ ed. Positive disconﬁ  rmation occurs when perception exceeds 
expectation. The customer might be pleasantly surprised or even 
delighted. This model assumes that customers have expectations, and 
that they are able to judge performance. A customer satisfaction paradox 
has been identiﬁ ed by expectations–disconﬁ rmation researchers. At times 
customers ’  expectations may be met but the customer is still not satisﬁ ed. 
This happens when the customer’s expectations are low.  ‘ I expected the 
plane to be late. It was. I’m unhappy! ’  
   Many companies research customer requirements and expectations to 
ﬁ nd out what is important for customers, and then measure customers ’
perceptions of their performance compared to the performance of 
competitors.
    Customer loyalty 
   Customer loyalty has also been the subject of considerable research. 
There are two major approaches to deﬁ  ning and measuring loyalty, one 
based on behaviour, the other on attitude. 
   Behavioural loyalty is measured by reference to customer purchasing 
behaviour. Loyalty is expressed in continued patronage and buying. 
There are two behavioural aspects to loyalty. First, is the customer still 
active? Secondly, have we maintained our share of customer spending? 

===== PAGE 68 =====
 
Understanding relationships 45
In portfolio purchasing environments, where customers buy products 
and services from a number of more-or-less equal suppliers, the share of 
customer spending question is more important. 
   Many direct marketing companies use RFM measures of behavioural 
loyalty. The most loyal are those who have high scores on the three 
behavioural variables: recency of purchases (R), frequency of purchases 
(F) and monetary value of purchases (M). The variables are measured as 
follows:
    R       /H11005      time elapsed since last purchase 
    F       /H11005      number of purchases in a given time period  
    M       /H11005      monetary value of purchases in a given time period. 
  Attitudinal loyalty is measured by reference to components of attitude 
such as beliefs, feelings and purchasing intention. Those customers 
who have a stronger preference for, involvement in, or commitment to a 
supplier are the more loyal in attitudinal terms. 
   Recently, researchers have combined both views into comprehensive 
models of customer loyalty. The best known is Dick and Basu’s model, 
as shown in Figure 2.7   .  
28   These authors identify four forms of loyalty, 
according to relative attitudinal strength and repeat purchase behaviour. 
 ‘ Loyals ’  are those who have high levels of repeat buying and a strong 
relative attitude.  ‘ Spurious loyals ’  have high levels of repeat purchase 
but weak relative attitude. Their repeat purchasing can be explained by 
inertia, high switching costs or indifference. Latent loyalty exists when a 
strong relative attitude is not accompanied by repeat buying. This might 
be evidence of weakness in the company’s distribution strategy, the 
product or service not being available when and where customers want. 
  From a practical point of view, the behavioural deﬁ  nition of loyalty 
is attractive because sales and proﬁ  ts derive from actions not attitudes. 
Loyals
Repeat purchase
Relative attitude
High
Weak
Low
Strong
Latent
loyalty
Spurious
loyalty
No
loyalty
 Figure 2.7 
      Two-dimensional 
model of customer 
loyalty    

===== PAGE 69 =====
 
46 Customer Relationship Management
However, taking the trouble to understand the causes of weak or negative 
attitudes in customers can help companies identify barriers to purchase. 
It is equally true that knowledge of strong or positive attitudes can help 
companies understand the causes of competitor-resistant commitment. 
However, it is not clear from the Dick and Basu model whether attitude 
precedes behaviour or behaviour precedes attitude. Researchers generally 
accept that causation is circular rather unidirectional. In other words, 
attitudes inﬂ uence behaviour, and behaviour inﬂ uences attitude. 
    Business performance 
   Business performance can be measured in many ways. The recent 
trend has been away from simple short-term ﬁ  nancial measures such 
as quarterly proﬁ  t or earnings per share. Leading companies are 
moving towards a more rounded set of performance indicators, such as 
represented by the balanced scorecard.  
29
   The balanced scorecard employs four sets of linked key performance 
indicators (KPI): ﬁ nancial, customer, process and learning and growth. 
The implied connection between these indicators is that people (learning 
and growth) do things (process) for customers (customer) that have 
effects on business performance (ﬁ nancial). 
   Customer-related KPIs that can be used to evaluate business 
performance following a CRM implementation include: customer 
satisfaction levels, customer retention rates, customer acquisition costs, 
number of new customers acquired, average customer tenure, customer 
loyalty (behavioural or attitudinal), sales per customer, revenue growth, 
market share and share of customer (wallet). 
   The balanced scorecard is highly adaptable to CRM contexts. 
Companies need to ask the following questions. What customer 
outcomes drive our ﬁ nancial performance? What process outcomes drive 
our customer performance? What learning and growth outcomes drive 
our process performance? The satisfaction–proﬁ  t chain suggests that the 
customer outcomes of satisfaction and loyalty are important drivers of 
business performance. 
   Share of customer (share of wallet or SOW) is a popular measure of 
CRM performance. If your company makes a strategic CRM decision 
to serve a particular market or customer segment, it will be keen to 
measure and grow its share of the chosen customers ’  spending. As 
indicated in Figure 2.8   , share of customer focuses on winning a greater 
share of targeted customers ’  or segments ’  spending, rather than market 
share. 
    Researching the 
satisfaction–proﬁ  t chain 
   We’ll now look at some of the research into the links between customer 
satisfaction, loyalty and business performance. Analysis has been done 

===== PAGE 70 =====
 
Understanding relationships 47
on international data, national data, industry data, corporate data and 
individual customer data. 
  The American Customer Satisfaction Index (ACSI) was established in 
1994. It has tracked the relationships between customer satisfaction and 
a number of antecedents and consequences, including customer loyalty 
as measured by customers ’  probability of buying at different price points. 
The ASCI model appears in  Figure 2.9   . Data are collected in telephone 
interviews with approximately 250 current customers of the larger 
companies in a number of industries. 
30   Results from the multi-industry 
study show that there is a strong correlation between customer satisfaction 
scores and corporate earnings in the next quarter. According to the ACSI 
organization,  ‘ the reason is that a satisﬁ  ed customer is more proﬁ  table 
than a dissatisﬁ ed one. If satisfaction declines, customers become more 
reluctant to buy unless prices are cut. If satisfaction improves the opposite 
is true ’ .   31   An independent study, using data from the ACSI, has also 
found that customer satisfaction had a considerable effect on business 
performance, although there was variation across sectors. 32
Share of customer spend
High
Few
Low
Many
Number of customers 
Traditional marketing
CRM
 Figure 2.8 
      Share of market 
versus share of 
customer    
Perceived
quality
Perceived
value
Customer
complaints
Customer
loyalty
Customer
satisfaction
(ACSI)
Customer
expectations  Figure 2.9 
      The American 
Customer
Satisfaction Index 
(ACSI) model
33    

===== PAGE 71 =====
 
48 Customer Relationship Management
   The European Customer Satisfaction Index, using a somewhat 
different model, analyses data from 11 European countries and also 
reports a strong relationship between customers ’  value perceptions, 
satisfaction levels and loyalty.  34
  At the national level, customer data from the Swedish Customer 
Satisfaction Barometer (SCSB) have been correlated with corporate 
proﬁ t performance since 1989. A lagged relationship has been identiﬁ ed, 
indicating that current customer satisfaction levels impact on tomorrow’s 
proﬁ t performance.  
35   The SCSB database matches customer-based 
measures with traditional ﬁ  nancial measures of business performance, 
such as productivity and return on investment (ROI). The SCSB is one of 
several such national indices. 
  A number of studies in different industries and companies – 
telecommunications, banking, airline and automobile distribution – 
support the relationship between customer satisfaction, loyalty and 
business performance. 
●       Telecommunications : one study of the telecoms industry found 
that a 10 per cent lift in a customer satisfaction index predicted a 2 
per cent increase in customer retention (a behavioural measure of 
loyalty) and a 3 per cent increase in revenues. The authors concluded 
that customer satisfaction was a lead indicator of customer retention, 
revenue and revenue growth.  
36
●       Banking : another study found that customer satisfaction in retail 
banking correlated highly with branch proﬁ  tability. Highly satisﬁ ed 
customers had balances 20 per cent higher than satisﬁ  ed customers, 
and, as satisfaction levels went up over time, so did account balances. 
The reverse was also true, as satisfaction levels fell, so did account 
balances.
37
●       Airlines : a study in the airline industry examined the link between 
customer dissatisfaction, operating income, operating revenue and 
operating expense. The study identiﬁ  ed the drivers of dissatisfaction 
as high load factors (i.e. seat occupancy), mishandled baggage and 
poor punctuality. The study concluded that as dissatisfaction rose, 
operating revenue (an indicator of customer behaviour) and operating 
proﬁ t both fell, and operating expense rose.  
38
●       Car distribution  : a study of Volvo car owners examined the links 
between customer satisfaction with three attributes – car purchase, 
workshop service and the vehicle itself – and dealer business 
performance. The results indicated that a one scale-point increase in 
overall customer satisfaction was associated with a 4 per cent increase 
in dealer proﬁ tability at next car purchase.  
39
●       Multi-industry : using 400 sets of matched corporate-level data obtained 
from two databases – the ACSI (see above, which provided customer 
satisfaction scores) and Standard and Poors ’  Compustat (which 
provided business proﬁ tability data) – Yeung and colleagues found a 
linear relationship between customer satisfaction scores and business 
proﬁ tability. They rise and fall together in the same time period. 40

===== PAGE 72 =====
 
Understanding relationships 49
   Research into the satisfaction–proﬁ  t chain has also been performed 
at the level of the individual customer. Using data collected from both 
customers and exporters in the Norwegian ﬁ  shing industry, Helgesen 
ﬁ nds support for both steps in the satisfaction–proﬁ t chain. 41   Satisfaction 
is positively associated with behavioural loyalty, which in turn is 
positively associated with customer proﬁ  tability. However, he notes 
that  ‘ the satisfaction level has to pass a certain threshold if it is to have 
any inﬂ  uence on customer loyalty ’ , and that as satisfaction increases it 
has a diminishing effect on loyalty. The same effects are observed in the 
relationship between loyalty and customer proﬁ  tability. Furthermore, 
only 10 per cent of the variance in each independent variable was 
accounted for by the dependent variable. 
  According to one review, there is  ‘ growing evidence that the links in 
the satisfaction–proﬁ  t chain are solid ’ .
42   However, the relationships can 
be both asymmetrical and non-linear. The asymmetric nature of the 
relationships is found by comparing the impact of an increase in one 
variable with an equivalent decrease. For example, a one-scale point shift 
up in customer satisfaction (say from three to four on a ﬁ  ve-point scale) 
may not have a comparable impact on customer retention rates as a 
one-scale point downward shift (say from three to two on the same ﬁ ve-
point scale). Secondly, links can be nonlinear. Nonlinearity is sometimes 
reﬂ ected in diminishing returns, at other times in increasing returns. For 
example, increasing returns may be obtained in repeat purchase levels 
as customers progress up the customer satisfaction scale, as shown in 
 Figure 2.10   . Diminishing returns may set in if customer expectations 
are already largely met. Investments in increasing customer satisfaction 
at already high levels of performance do not have the same impact as 
investments at lower levels of performance.  
Low
High
Repeat purchase rates
1234567
Customer satisfaction level
Not at all satisfied Very satisfied
 Figure 2.10 
      Non-linear 
relationship
between customer 
satisfaction and 
repeat purchase    

===== PAGE 73 =====
 
50 Customer Relationship Management
    Relationship management 
theories
   There are ﬁ ve main schools of thought that offer different perspectives on 
relationships between customers and suppliers. Although some schools 
are quite similar, they generally describe relationships in different terms 
and have different implications for relationship management. The 
major schools of thought are the Industrial Marketing and Purchasing 
(IMP) school, the Nordic school, the Anglo-Australian school, the North 
American school, and the Asian ( guanxi ) school. Each is brieﬂ y reviewed 
in the following sections. Concepts and themes from these schools have 
been incorporated into the preceding discussion. 
    The Industrial Marketing and Purchasing school 
   The Industrial Marketing and Purchasing school (IMP) has a dedicated 
focus on B2B relationships. The IMP school ﬁ  rst emerged in the late 
1970s when a number of European researchers began investigating B2B 
relationships with the simple goal of describing them accurately. Some 
of the major contributors to the IMP school are Malcolm Cunningham, 
David Ford, Lars-Erik Gadde, Håkan Håkansson, Ivan Snehota, Peter 
Naudé and Peter Turnbull.  
43
   The IMP school argues that B2B transactions occur within the context 
of broader, long-term relationships, which are, in turn, situated within a 
broader network of relationships. Any single B2B relationship between 
supplier and customer is composed of activity links, actor bonds 
and resource ties. IMP researchers were among the ﬁ  rst to challenge 
the view that transaction costs determined which supplier would be 
chosen by a customer. IMP researchers identiﬁ  ed the important impact 
of relationship history on supplier selection. The characteristics of B2B 
relationships, from an IMP perspective, are as follows: 
●      Buyers and sellers are both active participants in transactions, 
pursuing solutions to their problems rather than simply reacting to the 
other party’s inﬂ uence. 
●      Relationships between buyers and sellers are frequently long-term, 
are close in nature, and involve a complex pattern of interaction 
between and within each company.  
●      Buyer–seller links often become institutionalized into a set of roles 
that each party expects the other to perform, with expectations that 
adaptations will be made on an ongoing basis.  
●      Interactions occur within the context of the relationship’s history 
and the broader set of relationships each ﬁ  rm has with other ﬁ  rms – 
the ﬁ rm’s network of relationships. We examine the role of network 
members in the achievement of CRM goals in Chapter 10.  
●      Firms choose whom they interact with and how. The relationships 
that ﬁ rms participate in can be many and diverse, carried out for 
different purposes, with different partners, and have different levels 

===== PAGE 74 =====
 
Understanding relationships 51
of importance. These relationships are conducted within a context of a 
much broader network of relationships.  
●      Relationships are composed of actor bonds, activity links and 
resources ties, as now described.    
    Actor bonds 
   Actor bonds are deﬁ ned as follows: 
 Actor bonds are interpersonal contacts between actors in partner 
ﬁ rms that result in trust, commitment and adaptation between 
actors.44
  Actor bonds are a product of interpersonal communication and the 
subsequent development of trust. Adaptation of relationships over time 
is heavily inﬂ uenced by social bonding.  
    Activity links 
   Activity links can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 Activity links are the commercial, technical, ﬁ nancial, administrative 
and other connections that are formed between companies in 
interaction.
  Activities might centre on buying and selling, technical cooperation 
or inter-ﬁ rm projects of many kinds. Activities such as inter-partner 
knowledge exchange, the creation of inter-partner IT systems, the 
creation of integrated manufacturing systems such as just-in-time 
(JIT) and efﬁ  cient consumer response (ECR), the development of 
jointly implemented total quality management (TQM) processes, are 
investments that demonstrate commitment. 
   IMP researchers have focused on two major streams of activity-related 
research: the structure and cost effectiveness of activity links, and the 
behavioural characteristics that enable relationships to survive. The 
reduction of transaction costs is an important motivation for customers 
forming links with suppliers. Dyer argues that search costs, contracting 
costs, monitoring costs and enforcement costs (the four major types of 
transaction cost) can all be reduced through closer B2B relationships.  
45
    Resource ties 
   Resources are deﬁ ned as follows: 
 Resources are the human, ﬁ  nancial, legal, physical, managerial, 
intellectual and other strengths or weaknesses of an organization.  46
   Resource ties are formed when these resources are deployed in the 
performance of the activities that link supplier and customer. Resources 
that are deployed in one B2B relationship may strengthen and deepen 
that relationship. However, there may be an opportunity cost. Once 
resources (for example, people or money) are committed to one 
relationship they might not be available for another relationship.   

===== PAGE 75 =====
 
52 Customer Relationship Management
    The Nordic school 
   The Nordic school emphasizes the role of service in supplier–customer 
relationships. The main proponents of the Nordic school are Christian 
Grönroos and Evert Gümmesson.  47
   The Nordic school emerged from research into services marketing 
that began in the late 1970s, particularly in Scandinavia. The key idea 
advocated by the Nordic school is that service is a signiﬁ cant component 
of transactions between suppliers and their customers. Their work 
became inﬂ  uential in the development of the ﬁ  eld of relationship 
marketing, which presents a challenge to the transactional view of 
marketing that has been dominant for so long. The Nordic school’s 
approach has application in both B2B and B2C environments. Grönroos 
has deﬁ ned relationship marketing as follows: 
 Relationship marketing is the process of identifying and establishing, 
maintaining, enhancing, and, when necessary, terminating 
relationships with customers and other stakeholders, at a proﬁ  t, so 
that the objectives of all parties involved are met, where this is done 
by a mutual giving and fulﬁ lment of promises. 
48
   Gümmesson goes further, redeﬁ ning marketing as follows: 
 Marketing can be deﬁ  ned as  ‘ interactions, relationships, and 
networks ’ .   49
   The Nordic school identiﬁ es three major characteristics of commercial 
relationships – interaction, dialogue and value – known collectively as 
the  ‘ Triplet of Relationship Marketing ’ .50
    Interaction 
   The Nordic school suggests that inter-ﬁ  rm exchanges occur in a 
broader context of ongoing interactions. This is a signiﬁ  cant departure 
from traditional notions of marketing where interﬁ  rm exchanges are 
conceptualized as discrete, unrelated events, almost as if there is no 
history. From the Nordic school’s perspective, interactions are service-
dominant. As customers and suppliers interact, each performs services 
for the other. Customers supply information; suppliers supply solutions.  
    Dialogue 
  Suppliers and customers are in dialogue with each other. Indeed, 
communication between partners is essential to the functioning of the 
relationship. Traditional marketing thinking has imagined communication 
to be one way, from company to customer, but the Nordic school 
emphasizes the fact that communication is bilateral. 
    Value 
  The concepts of  ‘ value ’ ,  ‘ value creation ’  and  ‘ value creation systems ’  have 
become more important to managers over the past twenty years. The 
Nordic school stresses the mutual nature of value. To generate value from 

===== PAGE 76 =====
 
Understanding relationships 53
customers, companies need to generate customer-perceived value, that is, 
create and deliver something that is perceived to be of value to customers. 
Value creation therefore requires contributions from both buyer and 
seller. From the Nordic school’s perspective, service performance is a key 
contributor to customer-perceived value. 
    The Anglo–Australian school 
   The Anglo–Australian school takes the view that companies not only 
form relationships with customers, but also with a wide range of other 
stakeholders including employees, shareholders, suppliers, buyers 
and governments. The main proponents of this school are Martin 
Christopher, Adrian Payne, Helen Peck and David Ballantyne.  
51
   Stakeholder relationships vary in intensity according to the level 
of relationship investment, commitment and longevity. Unlike the 
IMP school which takes a descriptive approach, the Anglo–Australian 
school takes a more prescriptive approach. Their work sets out to help 
managers to improve relationships with stakeholder groups. 
  The major conceptual contribution of this school is their Six-Markets 
Model which has been revised several times (see  Figure 2.11   ). The model 
suggests that ﬁ rms must satisfy six major stakeholder  ‘ markets ’ : internal 
markets (employees), supplier/alliance markets (including major suppliers, 
joint venture partners and the like), recruitment markets (labour markets), 
referral markets (word-of-mouth advocates and cross-referral networks) 
inﬂ uence markets (these include governments, regulators, shareholders 
and the business press) and customer markets (both intermediaries and 
end-users). 
Recruitment
markets
Referral
markets
Influence
markets
Internal
markets
Supplier/
alliance
markets CUSTOMER
MARKETS
 Figure 2.11 
      The six-markets 
model
52    
   The school’s researchers have focused on a number of topics: customer 
retention, customer loyalty, customer satisfaction, customer relationship 
economics and value creation. One of their major ﬁ  ndings is that 

===== PAGE 77 =====
 
54 Customer Relationship Management
customer satisfaction and customer retention are drivers of shareholder 
value.53
    The North American school 
   The North American school receives less emphasis as a separate 
school of relationship management than other schools. Signiﬁ  cant 
contributors to this school are Jeffery Dyer, Sandy Jap, Shelby Hunt, 
Robert Dwyer, Jan Heide, Robert Morgan, and Jagdish Sheth. A major 
theme ﬂ  owing through this school’s work is the connection between 
successful inter-ﬁ rm relationships and excellent business performance. 
The school acknowledges that relationships reduce transaction costs, 54
and that trust and commitment are two very important attributes of 
successful relationships. Indeed, one of the more important theoretical 
contributions to come from the North American school is Morgan and 
Hunt’s  ‘ Commitment-Trust Theory of Relationship Marketing ’ . This 
was the ﬁ rst time that trust was explicitly linked to commitment in the 
context of customer–supplier relationships. According to the theory, trust 
is underpinned by shared values, communication, non-opportunistic 
behaviour, low functional conﬂ  ict and cooperation. Commitment, on 
the other hand, is associated not only with high relationship termination 
costs, but also with high relationship beneﬁ ts.  
55
   The North American school tends to view relationships as tools that a 
well-run company can manipulate for competitive advantage. They also 
focus on dyadic relationships rather than networks, most commonly 
buyer–supplier dyads or strategic alliance/joint venture partnerships.  
    The Asian (Guanxi) school 
   Guanxi is, essentially, a philosophy for conducting business and other 
interpersonal relationships in the Chinese, and broader Asian, context. 
Therefore, its effects have a signiﬁ  cant impact on how Asian societies 
and economies work. 
   The notion of Guanxi has been known to western economists since at 
least 1978. This was the time when the Chinese market began to open 
up to the west. 
56   The foundations of Guanxi are Buddhist and Confucian 
teachings regarding the conduct of interpersonal interactions. Guanxi 
refers to the informal social bonds and reciprocal obligations between 
various actors that result from some common social context, for example 
families, friendships and clan memberships. These are special types of 
relationships which impose reciprocal obligations to obtain resources 
through continual cooperation and exchange of favours.  
57
   Guanxi has become a necessary aspect of Chinese and, indeed, Asian 
business due to the lack of codiﬁ  ed, enforceable contracts such as those 
found in western markets. Guanxi determines who can conduct business 
with whom and under what circumstances. Business is conducted within 
networks, and rules based on status are invoked. Network members can 
only extend invitations to others to become part of their network if the 
invitee is a peer or a subordinate.

===== PAGE 78 =====
 
Understanding relationships 55
  References  
       1.          Barnes ,    J.G.             ( 2000 )        Secrets of customer relationship management             .  New 
York :       McGraw-Hill              .  
       2.          Heath ,    R.L.   and   Bryant ,    J.             ( 2000 )        Human communication theory and 
research: concepts, contexts and challenges             .  Mahwah, NJ :       Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates              .   
       3.          Dwyer ,    F.R.  ,   Schurr ,    P .H.   and   Oh ,    S.                ( 1987 )        Developing buyer–seller 
relationships .            Journal of Marketing       , Vol.  51         , pp.  11  –       27        .  
       4.         See, for example, Morgan, R.M. and Hunt, S.D. (1994) The commitment–
trust theory of relationship marketing.  Journal of Marketing  Vol. 58(3), 
pp. 20–38; Rousseau, D.M., Sitkin, S.B., Burt, R.S. and Camerer, C. 
(1998) Not so different after all: a cross-discipline view of trust. 
Academy of Management Review , Vol. 23(3), pp. 393–404; Selnes, F. (1998) 
Antecedents of trust and satisfaction in buyer–seller relationships. 
European Journal of Marketing , Vol. 32(3–4), pp. 305–322; Shepherd, B.B. 
and Sherman, D.M. (1998) The grammars of trust: a model and general 
implications.Academy of Management Review , Vol. 23(3), pp. 422–437. 
       5.          Singh ,    J.   and   Sirdeshmukh ,    D.                ( 2000 )        Agency and trust mechanisms 
in consumer satisfaction and loyalty judgements .             Journal of Marketing 
Science       , Vol.  28      ( 1 )       , pp.  255  –       271        .  
       6.          Harris ,    S.   and   Dibben ,    M.                ( 1999 )        Trust and co-operation in business 
relationship development: exploring the inﬂ uence of national values .
Journal of Marketing Management       , Vol.  15         , pp.  463  –       483        .  
        Summary      
   In this chapter you have learned that there are differing beliefs about what counts as a 
relationship. Although interactions over time are an essential feature of relationships, 
some believe that a relationship needs to have some emotional content. Although the 
character of a relationship can change over time, successful relationships are based 
on a foundation of trust and commitment. The primary motivation for companies 
trying to develop long-term relationships with customers is the proﬁ  t motive. There is 
strong evidence that long-term relationships with customers yield commercial beneﬁ  ts 
as companies strive to enhance customer lifetime value. The satisfaction–proﬁ  t chain 
suggests that customers who are satisﬁ  ed are more likely to become loyal, and high 
levels of customer loyalty are associated with excellent business performance. However, 
companies are advised to focus their customer acquisition and retention efforts on 
those who have proﬁ  t-potential or are otherwise strategically signiﬁ  cant. Although 
companies generally want to develop long-term relationships with customers, there 
are good reasons why customers don’t always share the same enthusiasm. Finally, the 
chapter closes with a discussion of several schools of management or marketing theory 
that shed light on customer relationship management. These are the IMP, Nordic, 
Anglo–Australian, North American and Asian (Guanxi) schools of thought.         

===== PAGE 79 =====
 
56 Customer Relationship Management
       7.          Morgan ,    R.M.   and   Hunt ,    S.D.                ( 1994 )        The commitment–trust theory 
of relationship marketing .            Journal of Marketing       , Vol.  58      ( 3 )       , pp.  20  –       38        .  
       8.         Buttle, F. and Biggemann, S. (2003) Modelling business-to-business 
relationship quality. Macquarie Graduate School of Management 
Working Paper #2003–3. 
       9.          Wilson ,    D.T.   and   Mummalaneni ,    V .                ( 1986 )        Bonding and commitment 
in supplier relationships: a preliminary conceptualization .  Industrial
Marketing and Purchasing       , Vol.  1      ( 3 )       , pp.  44  –       58        .  
      10.          http://www.allheadlinenews.com/articles/7009767911 . Accessed 20 
January 2008. 
      11.         The idea of strategic signiﬁ cance is discussed in Chapter 5. 
      12.          Reichheld ,    F.F.   and   Detrick ,    C.                ( 2003 )        Loyalty: a prescription for cutting 
costs .            Marketing Management       ,  September–October         , pp.  24  –       25        . 
      13.         Ang, L. and Buttle, F.A. (2002) ROI on CRM: A Customer Journey 
Approach. Proceedings of the Inaugural Asia-Paciﬁ c IMP conference, 
Bali, December 2002. 
      14.           Bain  &  Co/Mainline.          ( 1999 )        Customer spending on-line                .  Bain  &  Co              .  
      15.          Christopher ,    M.  ,   Payne ,    A.   and   Ballantyne ,    D.             ( 1991 )        Relationship 
Marketing            .  Oxford :       Butterworth-Heinemann              .  
      16.          Gordon ,    I.             ( 1998 )        Relationship marketing             .  Ontario :       John Wiley              .  
      17.          Reichheld ,    F.   and   Sasser ,    W.E.     Jr.                ( 1990 )        Zero defections: quality 
comes to services .             Harvard Business Review        ,  September–October         , 
pp. 105  –       111        .  
      18.           Bain  &  Co/Mainline.          ( 1999 )        Customer spending on-line                .  Bain  &  Co              .  
      19.          Ferron ,    J.             ( 2000 )       The customer-centric organization in the automobile 
industry – focus for the 21st century .        In:       S.     Brown  (ed.)       .      Customer
Relationship Management: A Strategic Imperative in the World of 
e-Business          .  Toronto :       John Wiley      , pp.  189  –       211        .  
      20.         IBM (2000) Business intelligence in the ﬁ nancial services industry: the 
case for differentiation.  http://sysdoc.doors.ch/IBM/fss_business_
intelligence_2.pdf . Accessed 20 January 2008. 
      21.         Reichheld, F. and Sasser, W.E. Jr (1990) Zero defections: quality 
comes to the services. Harvard Business Review  , September–October, 
pp. 105–111; see also Reichheld, F.F., Markey, R.G. and Hopton, C. 
(2000) The loyalty effect: the relationship between loyalty and proﬁ ts. 
European Business Journal , Vol. 12(3), pp. 134–139. 
      22.          Lee ,    J.  ,   Lee ,    J.   and   Fieck ,    L.                ( 2006 )        Incorporating word of mouth 
effects in estimating lifetime value .             Journal of Database Marketing and 
Customer Strategy Management       , Vol.  14      ( 1 )       , pp.  29  –       39        .  
      23.          Berger ,    P .D.   and   Nasr ,    N.I.                ( 1998 )        Customer lifetime value: marketing 
models and applications .             Journal of Interactive Marketing        , Vol.  12      ( 1 )       , 
Winter, pp.  17  –       30            .  
      24.          Biong ,    H.  ,   Wathne ,    K.   and   Parvatiyar ,    A.             ( 1997 )       Why do some 
companies not want to engage in partnering relationships?         In: 
      H.-G.     Gemünden  ,   T.     Ritter   and   A.     Walter  (eds)       .      Relationships and 
networks in international markets          .  Oxford :       Pergamon      , pp.  91  –       108        .  
      25.          Anderson ,    E.W.   and   Mittal ,    V .                ( 2000 )        Strengthening the satisfaction–
proﬁ t chain .            Journal of Service Research       , Vol.  3      ( 2 )       , pp.  107  –       120        .  
      26.          Anderson ,    E.W.                ( 1994 )        Cross category variation in customer 
satisfaction and retention .             Marketing Letters       , Vol.  5         , Winter, pp.  19  –       30            .  

===== PAGE 80 =====
 
Understanding relationships 57
      27.          Oliver ,    R.L.             ( 1997 )        Satisfaction: a behavioural perspective on the consumer             .  
 Singapore :       McGraw-Hill International              .  
      28.          Dick ,    A.S.   and   Basu ,    K.                ( 1994 )        Customer loyalty: towards an 
integrated framework .             Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science        ,  
Vol.  22      ( 2 )       , pp.  99  –       113        .  
      29.          Kaplan ,    R.S.   and   Norton ,    D.P .             ( 1996 )        The balanced scorecard             .  Boston, 
MA :       Harvard Business School Press              .  
      30.          Fornell ,    C.  ,   Johnson ,    M.D.  ,   Anderson ,    E.W.  ,   Jaesung ,    C.   and   Bryant ,    B.E.                
( 1996 )        The American customer satisfaction index: nature, purpose, 
and ﬁ ndings .            Journal of Marketing       , Vol.  60      ( 4 )       , October, pp.  7  –       18            .  
      31.          http://www.theacsi.org/predictive_capabilities.htm . Accessed 30 
November 2005. 
      32.          Yeung ,    M.C.H.   and   Ennew ,    C.T.                ( 2001 )        Measuring the impact of 
customer satisfaction on proﬁ  tability: a sectoral analysis .  Journal
of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing        , Vol.  19      ( 2 )       , 
pp. 106  –       116        .  
  33. Copyright © 2008. ACSI, University of Michigan Business School. 
Used with permission.  
      34.          Cassel ,    C.   and   Eklof ,    J.A.                ( 2001 )        Modeling customer satisfaction and 
loyalty on aggregate levels: experience from the ECSI pilot study . 
Total Quality Management       , Vol.  12      ( 7–8 )       , pp.  834  –       841        .  
      35.          Anderson ,    E.W.  ,   Fornell ,    C.   and   Lehman ,    D.R.                ( 1994 )        Customer 
satisfaction, market share and proﬁ  tability: ﬁ ndings from Sweden .
Journal of Marketing       ,  July         , pp.  53  –       66        .  
      36.          Ittner ,   C.D.   and   Larcker ,    D.F.                ( 1998 )        Are non-ﬁ nancial indictors of 
ﬁ nancial performance? An analysis of customer satisfaction .  Journal
of Accounting Research       , Vol.  36       ( supplement 1998 )       , pp.  1  –       46        .  
      37.          Carr ,    N.G.                ( 1999 )        The economics of customer satisfaction .             Harvard
Business Review       , Vol.  77      ( 2 )       ,                  March–April, pp. 15–18     .   
      38.          Behn ,    B.K.   and   Riley ,    R.A.                ( 1999 )        Using non-ﬁ nancial information 
to predict ﬁ nancial performance: the case of the US airline industry . 
Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Finance       , Vol.  14      ( 1 )       , pp.  29  –       56        .  
      39.          Gustaffson ,    A.   and   Johnson ,    M.D.                ( 2002 )        Measuring and managing 
the satisfaction–loyalty–performance links at Volvo .            Journal of 
Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing        , Vol.  10      ( 3 )       , 
pp. 249  –       258        .
      40.          Yeung ,    M.C.H.  ,   Ging ,    L.C.   and   Ennew ,    C.                ( 2002 )        Customer 
satisfaction and proﬁ  tability: a reappraisal of the relationship . 
Journal of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing       , Vol.  11      ( 1 )       , 
p p . 2 4   –        3 3         .   
      41.          Helgesen ,    O.                ( 2006 )        Are loyal customers proﬁ table? Customer 
satisfaction, customer (action) loyalty and customer proﬁ  tability 
at the individual level .             Journal of Marketing Management        , Vol.  22         , 
pp. 245  –       266        .
      42.          Anderson ,    E.W.   and   Mittal ,    V .                ( 2000 )        Strengthening the satisfaction–
proﬁ t chain .            Journal of Service Research       , Vol.  3      ( 2 )       , pp.  107  –       120        .  
      43.         The IMP group has its own dedicated website,  www.impgroup.org ,
annual conference and are proliﬁ  c publishers of books and papers, 
a number of which follow. Cunningham, M. (1980) International 
marketing and purchasing: features of a European research project. 

===== PAGE 81 =====
 
58 Customer Relationship Management
European Journal of Marketing , Vol. 14(5–6), pp. 5–21; Ford, D., Gadde, 
L.-E., Håkansson, H. and Snehota, I. (2003 ) Managing business 
relationships  (2nd edn). Chichester, UK: John Wiley  &  Sons; Ford, D. and 
McDowell, R. (1999) Managing business relationships by analysing the 
effects and value of different actions . Industrial Marketing Management , 
Vol. 28, pp. 429–442; Ford, D. and Redwood, M. (2004) Making sense 
of network dynamics through network pictures: a longitudinal case 
study.  Industrial Marketing Management , Vol. 34(7), pp. 648–657; Gadde, 
L. E., Huemer, L. and Håkansson, H. (2003) Strategizing in industrial 
networks. Industrial Marketing Management  , Vol. 32, pp. 357–364; 
Håkansson, H. and Ford, D. (2002) How should companies interact in 
business networks? Journal of Business Research  , Vol. 55, pp. 133–139; 
Håkansson, H. and Snehota, I. (1995)Developing relationships in business 
networks . London: Routledge; Håkansson, H. E. (1982).  International 
marketing and purchasing of industrial goods: an interaction approach  . 
Chichester: John Wiley; Turnbull, P .W. and Cunningham, M. (1980) 
International marketing and purchasing: a survey among marketing and 
purchasing executives in ﬁ  ve European countries  . London: Macmillan; 
Zolkiewski, J. and Turnbull, P . (2002) Do relationship portfolios and 
networks provide the key to successful relationship management? 
Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing , Vol. 17(7), pp. 575–597. 
      44.          Håkansson ,    H.   and   Snehota ,    I.             ( 1995 )        Developing relationships in 
business networks             .  London :       Routledge              .  
      45.         Dyer, J.H. (1997) Effective inter-ﬁ rm collaboration: how ﬁ  rms 
minimize transaction costs and maximise transaction value. Strategic
Management Journal , Vol. 18(7), pp. 535–556; Dyer, J.H. and Chu, W. 
(2003) The role of trustworthiness in reducing transaction costs and 
improving performance: empirical evidence from the United States, 
Japan and Korea.  Organisation Science , Vol. 14(1), pp. 57–68. 
      46.         Deﬁ nition based on Barney, J.B. (1991) Firm resources and sustained 
competitive advantage. Journal of Management  , Vol. 17(1), pp. 99–120 
and Wernerfelt, B. (1984) A resource-based view of the ﬁ rm.  Strategic
Management Journal , Vol. 5(2), pp. 171–180. 
      47.         Christian Grönroos and Evert Gummesson are proliﬁ c authors. 
Among their works are the following. Grönroos, C. (1996) Relationship 
marketing logic. Asia-Australia Marketing Journal , Vol. 4(1), pp. 7–18; 
Grönroos, C. (1997) Value-driven relational marketing: from products 
to resources and competencies.  Journal of Marketing Management , Vol. 
13, pp. 407–420; Grönroos, C. (2000a) Creating a relationship dialogue: 
communication, interaction and value.The Marketing Review , Vol. 1, pp. 
5–14; Grönroos, C. (2000b) Relationship marketing: the Nordic School 
perspective. J.N. Sheth and A. Parvatiyar (eds).  Handbook of Relationship 
Marketing . London: Sage Publications, pp. 95–120; Grönroos, C. (2004) 
The relationship marketing process: communication, interaction, 
dialogue, value. Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing , Vol. 19(2), 
pp. 99–113; Gummesson, E. (1990)  The part-time marketer  . Karlstad, 
Sweden: Center for Service Research; Gummesson, E. (1987) The 
new marketing: developing long-term interactive relationships.  Long 
Range Planning , Vol. 20(4), pp. 10–20; Gummesson, E. (1994) Making 
relationship marketing operational.  International Journal of Service 
Industry Management  , Vol. 5(5), pp. 5–20; Gummesson, E. (1996) 

===== PAGE 82 =====
 
Understanding relationships 59
Relationship marketing and imaginary organisations: A synthesis .
European Journal of Marketing  , Vol. 30, pp. 31–44; Gummesson, E. 
(1997a). In search of marketing equilibrium: relationship marketing 
versus hypercompetition.  Journal of Marketing Management , Vol. 13, pp. 
421–430; Gummesson, E. (1997b) Relationship marketing as a paradigm 
shift: some conclusions from the 30R approach.  Management Decision , 
Vol. 35(4), pp. 267–272; Gummesson, E. (1997c) Relationship marketing: 
the emperor’s new clothes or a paradigm shift?  Marketing and Research 
Today , Vol. 25(1), pp. 53–61; Gummesson, E. (2002) Relationship 
marketing and a new economy: it’s time for de-programming.  Journal 
of Services Marketing , Vol. 16(7), pp. 585–589. 
      48.          Grönroos ,    C.                ( 1997 )        Value-driven relational marketing: from products 
to resources and competencies .             Journal of Marketing Management       , Vol. 
 13         , pp.  407  –       420        .  
      49.          Gummesson ,    E.                ( 1997 )        Relationship marketing as a paradigm shift: 
some conclusions from the 30R approach .            Management Decision       , Vol. 
 35      ( 4 )       , pp.  267  –       272        .  
      50.          Grönroos ,    C.                ( 2000 )        Creating a relationship dialogue: communication, 
interaction and value .             The Marketing Review       , Vol.  1         , pp.  5  –       14        .  
      51.         Christopher, M., Payne, A. and Ballantyne, D. (1991)  Relationship
marketing: bringing quality, customer service and marketing together  . 
Oxford: Butterworth-Heineman; Payne, A. (2000) Relationship 
marketing: the UK perspective. In: J.N. Sheth and A. Parvatiyar 
(eds.). Handbook of Relationship Marketing . London: Sage Publications, 
pp. 39–67; Peck, H., Payne, A., Christopher, M. and Clark, M. 
(1999) Relationship marketing: strategy and implementation  . Oxford: 
Butterworth-Heinemann.
   52.  Peck, H.,  Payne, A., Christoper, M. and Clark, M. (1999)  Relationship 
Marketing: strategy and implementation . Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann. 
      53.         Payne, A. and Frow, P . (2005) A strategic framework for customer 
relationship management.  Journal of Marketing  , Vol. 69, pp. 167–176; 
Payne, A. and Holt, S. (2001) Diagnosing customer value: integrating 
the value process and relationship marketing.  British Journal of 
Management , Vol. 12(2), pp. 159–182. 
      54.         Heide, J.B. (1994) Inter-organisational governance in marketing 
channels. Journal of Marketing  , Vol. 58(1), pp. 71–86; Heide, J.B. and 
John, G. (1990) Alliances in industrial purchasing: the determinants 
of joint action in buyer-supplier relationships.  Journal of Marketing 
Research , Vol. 27(1), pp. 24–36. 
      55.         Morgan, R.M. and Hunt, S.D. (1994) The commitment–trust theory 
of relationship marketing.  Journal of Marketing  , Vol. 58(3), pp. 20–39; 
Gao, T., Joseph S.M. and Bird, M.M. (2005) Reducing buyer decision-
making uncertainty in organizational purchasing: can supplier trust, 
commitment, and dependence help? Journal of Business Research , Vol. 
58(4), pp. 397–406. 
      56.          Ambler ,   T.                ( 1995 )        Reﬂ ections in China: re-orienting images of 
marketing .            Marketing Management       , Vol.  4      ( 1 )       , pp.  23  –       30        .  
      57.          Davies ,    H.A.  ,   Leung ,    T.K.P .  ,   Luk ,    S.T.K.   and   Wong ,    Y.H.                ( 1995 )        The 
beneﬁ ts of Guanxi: an exploration of the value of relationships in 
developing the Chinese market .  Industrial Marketing Management        ,  
Vol.  24         , pp.  207  –       214        .

===== PAGE 83 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 84 =====
 
                          Planning and 
implementing
customer relationship 
management projects 
 Chapter 3 

===== PAGE 85 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 86 =====
 
           Chapter objectives      
   By the end of this chapter, you will be aware of: 
    1.   ﬁ ve major phases in a CRM implementation  
    2.   a number of tools and processes that can be applied in each phase of an 
implementation  
    3.   the importance of project management and change management throughout the 
implementation process.         
    Introduction 
   In the ﬁ rst chapter you were introduced to strategic, operational, 
analytical and collaborative CRM. You also learned that although CRM 
projects generally involve technology implementations, people and 
processes can also play a large part. Indeed, we said that IT cannot 
compensate for bad processes and inept people. Most CRM projects 
involve consideration of all three components. 
  You may have sensed from this discussion that CRM projects can vary 
considerably in their scope. An organization-wide CRM project that 
automates selling, marketing and service processes might involve process 
reengineering, people re-skilling and implementation of a comprehensive 
range of technology applications from a CRM suite vendor like SAP . 
The project might span several years and cost many millions of dollars. 
A small CRM project might involve rolling out an off-the-shelf contact 
management system such as GoldMine or SAGE to a sales team. This 
might take a couple of months to implement and cost less than a thousand 
dollars to complete. 
    CRM implementation 
  In this chapter we’ll look at the ﬁ  ve major phases of a CRM 
implementation, and the processes and tools that can be used within those 
phases to ensure that CRM projects deliver what is expected of them. 1
Depending on the scope of the project some of these phases, processes 
and tools may not be required. The key phases, as shown in  Figure 3.1    are: 
    1.     develop the CRM strategy 
    2.     build the CRM project foundations 
    3.     specify needs and select partner 
    4.     implement the project 
    5.     evaluate performance. 

===== PAGE 87 =====
 
64 Customer Relationship Management
   Embedded within each of these ﬁ  ve key phases are a number of 
decision-points and activities, as follows: 
    1.     Develop the CRM strategy: 
       ●      situation analysis 
       ●      commence CRM education 
       ●      develop the CRM vision 
       ●      set priorities 
       ●      establish goals and objectives 
       ●      identify people, process and technology requirements 
       ●      develop the business case. 
    2.     Build the CRM project foundations: 
       ●      identify stakeholders 
       ●      establish governance structures 
       ●      identify change management needs 
       ●      identify project management needs 
       ●      identify critical success factors 
       ●      develop risk management plan. 
    3.     Specify needs and select partner: 
       
●      process mapping and reﬁ nement  
       ●      data review and gap analysis 
       ●       initial technology needs speciﬁ cation, and research alternative 
solutions
       ●      write request for proposals (RFP) 
       ●      call for proposals  
       ●      revise technology needs identiﬁ cation  
       ●      assessment and partner selection. 
    4.     Implement project: 
       
●      r e ﬁ ne project plan  
       ●      identify technology customization needs 
       ●      prototype design, test, modify and roll out. 
2. Build
CRM project foundations
3. Needs specification
and partner selection
4. Project
implementation
5. Performance
evaluation
1. Develop
CRM strategy
 Figure 3.1 
      CRM project design 
and planning 
process    

===== PAGE 88 =====
 
Planning and implementing customer relationship management projects 65
    5.     Evaluate performance: 
       ●      project outcomes 
       ●      business outcomes. 
   The rest of this chapter will add further detail to the CRM project design 
and planning process.  
    Phase 1: Develop the CRM 
strategy
   CRM strategy can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 CRM strategy is a high-level plan of action that aligns people, 
processes and technology to achieve customer-related goals. 
    Situation analysis 
   Development of the CRM strategy starts with a situation analysis. This 
analysis sets out to describe, understand and appraise the company’s 
current customer strategy. It helps to have an organizing framework 
to guide your analysis. The comprehensive models of CRM that are 
described in Chapter 1 might be helpful. Another useful framework is 
the customer strategy cube. This is a three-dimensional analysis of your 
company’s served market segments, market offerings and channels 
(routes to market). The situation analysis answers the questions,  ‘ Where 
are we now? ’ , and  ‘ Why are we where we are? ’  in terms of the three 
dimensions of the cube. 
   Figure 3.2    illustrates the customer strategy cube of a company that 
sells four different offerings to ﬁ  ve different market segments though 
Customers or segments
Offers Channels
12 3 4 5
O1
O2
O3
O4
A
B
C
 Figure 3.2 
      Customer strategy 
cube    

===== PAGE 89 =====
 
66 Customer Relationship Management
three different channels. Each block in this cube (there are 60 (5      /H11003      4   /H11003  3) 
of them) might be a potential business unit that would be subject to a 
situation analysis. In fact, most businesses do not operate in all potential 
business units of their customer strategy cube. They operate selectively. For 
example, AMP sells ﬁ nancial products through a network of independent 
and tied ﬁ nancial planners. They do not sell direct to the consumer. Not all 
offerings are sold to all market segments through all channels. 
   The situation analysis examines the three dimensions of the customer 
strategy cube independently and jointly. Questions such as the following 
are asked.  
    Customers or segments 
   Which segments do we target? Which segments do we serve? What 
are our customer-related marketing and sales objectives? How much 
do we sell to customers? How satisﬁ  ed are they? What is our market 
share? What is our share of customer spending? How effective are 
our customer acquisition strategies and tactics? How effective are our 
customer retention strategies and tactics? How effective are our customer 
development (cross-sell and up-sell) strategies and tactics? What are 
the customer touchpoints? What do our customers think about their 
experience of doing business with us? Which customer management 
processes have most impact on our costs or customer experience? Which 
technologies do we use to support our marketing, selling and service 
functions, and how well do they operate?  
    Market offerings 
   Which products do we offer? What is our branding strategy? How well 
known are our offerings? Who do we compete against? What advantages 
or disadvantages do we offer vis-à-vis our competitors? How do we 
augment and add value to our basic product offer? What beneﬁ  ts do 
customers experience from our offerings? How do our prices compare 
with our competitors? What are our margins?  
    Channels 
   Which channels do we use to distribute to our customers – direct and 
indirect? Which channels are most effective? What level of channel 
penetration do we have? Which channels are becoming more/less 
important? Where do our competitors distribute? What do channel 
partners think of their experience of doing business with us? What 
margins do channel members earn? Which channel management 
processes have most impact on our costs or channel member experience? 
  The goal of this audit is get a clear insight into the strengths and 
weaknesses of the company’s customer strategy. Data can be collected 
from executives, managers, customer contact people and, importantly, 
customers. Business plans can be studied. One of the outcomes might 
be a customer interaction map, as in  Figure 3.3   , that identiﬁ  es all 
customer touchpoints and the processes that are performed at those 

===== PAGE 90 =====
 
Planning and implementing customer relationship management projects 67
touchpoints. Normally, the interactions that have important impact on 
customer experience or your own costs become primary candidates for 
reengineering and/or automation. The audit will serve as the start point 
for thinking about what you want to achieve from a CRM implementation.  
    Commence CRM education 
   CRM, as you have read in Chapter 1, is a term that means different 
things to different people. There is considerable misunderstanding 
about it. If you are about to embark on a CRM implementation, it is 
important that all stakeholders have a clear understanding of what CRM 
denotes. Your IT people might think that it is a technology project. Your 
marketing people might think it is something to do with a new approach 
to market segmentation. Your sales people might think it is about a 
new centralized database for customer records. Education has the twin 
beneﬁ ts of allaying any fears that people might have, based on their 
misunderstandings, and encouraging participation from people whose 
jobs might be impacted. Education enables stakeholders to identify 
opportunities to improve their workplace. 
  There are very few educational programmes available. The Institute 
of Direct Marketing offers a suite of introductory study materials, 
3   the 
American Marketing Association publishes a narrow range of tutorial 
Replacement
product
Direct
outlet
Purchase
Purchase
Consumer
Retailer
Information
Advertising
Web sities
Sales call,
promotion
Marketing
Direct
mail
Accounting
AP , AR
Remittance
claim
Order
Sales support,
customer service
Order
Withdrawal
data
Rebate
payment
Delivery
Delivery,
Invoice
Delivery
invoice
Price list
Price list,
Delivery,
Invoice
Account
manager
Ullage
Wholesaler
Warehouse
 Figure 3.3        Customer interaction map2    

===== PAGE 91 =====
 
68 Customer Relationship Management
materials, but the Chartered Institute of Marketing offers nothing. 4   Some 
of the richest resources are to be found in online CRM communities – 
self-help groups organized around a shared interest in CRM. Some of the 
better websites are  www.customerthink.com  (formerly www.crmguru.
com ),  www.mycustomer.com  (formerly www.insightexec.com , and before 
that www.crm-forum.com ),  www.sharedinsights.com ,  www.eccs.uk.com , 
searchcrm.techtarget.com,  www.crm2day.com ,  www.crmdirectory.com  
and www.intelligententerprise.com . CRM vendors publish case histories 
which can give you a good idea of what is possible. Alternatively, you 
could use this book! 
    Develop the CRM vision 
  Your CRM vision is a high-level statement of how CRM will change 
your business as it relates to customers. The software-as-a-service (SaaS) 
company, salesforce.com, provides a number of examples of CRM 
visions.5
●      We will work with our members in a trust-based relationship to 
represent their interests and to satisfy their needs for high value, 
security and peace of mind in motoring, travel and home.  
●      Nurturing relationships one cup at a time. Deliver a customer 
experience that consistently develops enthusiastically satisﬁ  ed 
customers in every market in which we do business.  
●      Build and maintain long-term relationships with valuable customers 
by creating personalized experiences across all touchpoints and by 
anticipating customer needs and providing customized offers.  
●      Nothing is more important than making every user successful. (This 
is salesforce.com’s own CRM vision.) 
   The CRM vision gives shape and direction to your CRM strategy. The 
CRM vision might be senior management’s perspective, based on what 
they learned from the education process, or it could be the product of a 
wider visioning process that engages more members of your company, 
perhaps even customers and partners. The vision will eventually guide 
the development of measurable CRM outcomes.  
    Set priorities 
   CRM projects vary in their scope and can touch on one or more 
customer-facing parts of your business – sales, marketing or service. 
Clear priorities for action, normally focused on cost reduction or 
enhanced customer experience, might fall out of the situation analysis, 
but more time and debate is often necessary. Priority might be given to 
projects which produce quick wins, fast returns or are low-cost. Longer-
term priorities might prove more difﬁ  cult to implement. For example, 
you may want to prioritize a new segmentation of customers based on 
their potential proﬁ tability. An impediment to that outcome would be 
your company’s inability to trace costs of selling, marketing and service 
to customers. You may need to prioritize the implementation of an 
activity-based costing system before performing the new segmentation.  

===== PAGE 92 =====
 
Planning and implementing customer relationship management projects 69
    Establish goals and objectives 
  Goals and objectives emerge from the visioning and prioritizing processes. 
Although the terms ‘ goals ’  and  ‘ objectives ’  tend to be used synonymously, 
we use the word  ‘ goal ’  to refer to a qualitative outcome and  ‘ objective ’  
to refer to a measurable outcome. For example, a CRM goal might be to 
acquire new customers. A related CRM objective could be to generate 200 
additional leads by the fourth quarter of the next ﬁ nancial year. 
    Figure 3.4    reports data from Gartner Inc. 
6   Their research shows that 
CRM goals generally cluster into three broad areas: enhancing customer 
satisfaction or loyalty, growing revenues or reducing costs. The bars in 
the chart show the percentage of respondents to their survey reporting 
each CRM goal. It is clear from this information that CRM strategies 
often pursue several goals. Among the most frequently cited goals are 
increased customer satisfaction and retention, reﬂ  ecting the satisfaction–
proﬁ t chain introduced in Chapter 2. 02 0 4 0 6 0 8 0
Other
Reduce cost of marketing
Increase partner loyalty
Increase profit margins
Improve lead quality and conversion
Reduce costs of sales
Increase acquisition of new customers
Increase marketing campaign response rates 
Acquire new customers
Increase profit per customer
Increase sales revenues
Increase customer loyalty
Increase customer retention
Increase customer satisfaction
Enhance cross/up-sell opportunities
Loyalty,
satisfaction
Revenue
enhancement
Cost reduction
 Figure 3.4 
      Strategic goals for 
CRM    
   Measurable objectives created at this time will later serve to evaluate 
the performance of the CRM implementation.  
    Identify people, process and technology 
requirements 
   The next step is to begin the process of identifying the people, process 
and technology requirements for the goals and objectives to be achieved. 
You’ll return to these matters repeatedly as the project unfolds, but at 
this stage you need a general idea of the changes that are necessary so 
that you can begin to identify costs and construct a business case. If your 
goal is to enhance cross-selling opportunities you might need to invest 

===== PAGE 93 =====
 
70 Customer Relationship Management
in training sales people to ask the right questions, engineering a new 
opportunity management process and acquiring sales-force automation 
software.  
    Develop the business case 
   The business case is built around the costs and beneﬁ  ts of the CRM 
implementation and answers the question: ‘ Why should we invest in 
this CRM project? ’  The business case looks at both costs and revenues. 
CRM implementations can generate additional revenues in a number 
of ways: 
●      conversion of more leads from suspect to prospect to opportunity  
●      more cross-selling and up-selling 
●      more accurate product pricing 
●      higher levels of customer satisfaction and retention  
●      higher levels of word-of-mouth inﬂ uence  
●      more leads and/or sales from marketing campaigns  
●      incremental sales from more effective selling processes. 
   Costs can be reduced by: 
●      improved lead generation and qualiﬁ cation  
●      lower costs of customer acquisition 
●      more efﬁ cient account management  
●      less waste in marketing campaigns 
●      reduced customer service costs 
●      more efﬁ cient front-ofﬁ ce processes. 
   However, these beneﬁ ts need to be assessed against the costs of the 
CRM implementation. The costs of a CRM project may extend well 
beyond the costs of CRM software. Additional costs may be incurred 
from systems integration, infrastructure costs, new desktop, laptop or 
handheld devices, software conﬁ  guration, data modelling, beta-testing, 
helpdesk support, change management, project management, process 
reengineering, software upgrades, training and consultancy services, let 
alone the opportunity costs of diverting your own staff members from 
their routine work. For a simple CRM project IT costs may represent one 
quarter of the total project cost; for a complex project IT costs may be as 
low as one tenth of the total project cost. 
  Some business cases are able to ignore technology costs. Many 
companies using enterprise software from Oracle and SAP are already 
paying for CRM modules in their inclusive licence fees. A licensed SAP 
user, for example, might be using enterprise software only for back-
ofﬁ ce functions. However, the licence fee permits the company to use the 
enterprise suite’s CRM modules. No additional licence costs are incurred 
though there may be substantial customization and implementation 
costs associated with switching on the unused CRM modules. Other 
companies that elect to deploy CRM through the SaaS approach, rather 
than installing software on their own hardware, treat CRM software as an 

===== PAGE 94 =====
 
Planning and implementing customer relationship management projects 71
operating expense. They simply treat software costs, based on a per-user 
monthly fee, as an operational expense that can be allocated to marketing, 
sales or service budgets. 
   Many of these costs and beneﬁ  ts are measurable, but there are also 
likely to be some important strategic beneﬁ  ts that are much harder to 
value, for example, development of a customer-centric way of doing 
business, better customer experience, improved responsiveness to 
changes in the market or competitive environments, more information 
sharing between business silos, improved customer service, more 
harmonious relationships with customers and the development of an 
information-based competitive advantage. 
   The business case should span a period equivalent to the economic life 
of the proposed solution. This is particularly important when comparing 
different implementation models such as on-premise CRM and SaaS 
(software–as–a–service). While the upfront costs of these two approaches 
are vastly different, the total cost of ownership can even out over a 3–4 
year period  . 
   The result of this analysis may be summarized in a range of statistics 
including total cost of ownership, payback period, internal rate of return 
and net present value, as shown in  Figure 3.5   .    
CRM Business Case Prepared by: Customer Connect Australia
Benefit - Cost Summary Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5
Total Bottom Line Benefits Per Year
Cumulative Benefits, Present Value 
$150,000
$150,000
$1,500,000
$1,500,000
Weighted Average Total Costs Per Year
Cumulative Costs, Present Value
Net Cash Flow
Cumulative Net Present Value Cash Flow
/H11002$750,000
/H11002$750,000
Internal Rate of Return
Net Present Value, 5 Years
Return on Investment, Present Value, 5 Years
Payback Period, Years
129%
$3,100,000
107%
2.0
Cumulative Net Present Value Cash Flow
/H11002$1,000,000
/H11002$500,000
$0
$500,000
$1,000,000
$1,500,000
$2,000,000
$2,500,000
$3,000,000
$3,500,000
Year 1
$3,100,000$3,100,000$2,900,000$2,500,000
$9,100,000
$110,000
$2,900,000
$1,500,000$1,450,000$1,400,000$700,000
$2,800,000$2,600,000$2,550,000
$250,000$90,000
$7,100,000$4,950,000$2,500,000
$1,100,000
/H11002$25,000 $3,100,000$1,100,000 $2,200,000
Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5
 Figure 3.5        Business case summary data7    

===== PAGE 95 =====
 
72 Customer Relationship Management
    Phase 2: Build CRM project 
foundations
   Having created the CRM strategy the next phase involves building the 
foundations for the CRM implementation. 
    Identify stakeholders 
   The ﬁ rst step is to identify stakeholders. Stakeholders include any 
party that will be impacted by the change – this could include senior 
management, users of any new system, marketing staff, salespeople, 
customer service agents, channel partners, customers and IT specialists. 
Their participation in the CRM project may be required at some future 
point. Research suggests that the early involvement of parties affected by 
change helps pre-empt later problems of resistance. Vendor experience 
indicates that the early involvement and participation of senior 
management is likely to promote a more successful implementation.  
   System users are important stakeholders. The importance of involving 
system users in the implementation of new technologies is reinforced 
by research conducted by Fred Davis and others. Davis found that 
intention to use a new technology is predicted by the perceived ease-of-
use of the technology and the perceived usefulness of the technology. 
This is expressed in the Technology Acceptance Model which has been 
subjected to considerable testing and validation since Davis’s initial 
work.
8  Early engagement of user stakeholders can help ensure that the 
technology is perceived as both easy-to-use and useful by users. 
Perceived
usefulness
External
variables
Perceived
ease of use
Attitude to
use
Intention to
use Actual use
 Figure 3.6 
      The Technology 
Acceptance Model    
    Establish governance structures 
   CRM projects are designed and implemented by people. Governance 
structures (see  Figure 3.6   ) need to be put in place to ensure that project 
roles and responsibilities are properly deﬁ ned and allocated. 

===== PAGE 96 =====
 
Planning and implementing customer relationship management projects 73
  The programme director (PD) plays an important role in this structure. 
Ultimately, the PD has responsibility for ensuing that the project 
deliverables are achieved and that project costs are controlled. In larger 
projects the PD will be a full-time appointment. The PD has a boundary-
spanning role – one foot is in the CRM steering committee, the other is 
in the programme team. Another key member of the steering committee 
is the executive sponsor. This is typically a board level senior executive 
who commits real time to the project and ensures that resources are 
made available. The steering committee makes policy decisions about 
the CRM implementation – for example, which technology to buy, which 
consultants to hire – and ensures that the implementation stays on track 
and within budget. Other senior executives may sit on the steering 
committee to ensure that the project remains business-focused and does 
not slide into becoming an IT-dominated project. 
  The programme team is composed of representatives from the major 
stakeholders (shown in Figure 3.7 as ‘Lead’ roles). They have the 
responsibility of implementing the project successfully. The Leads may 
have their own advisory groups that ensure that stakeholder needs 
and concerns are known and brought to the programme team. More 
importantly, the Leads are responsible for ensuring that the right people 
are brought in for speciﬁ  c project activities. For example, if the selling 
process is being reviewed, the sales Lead would ensure the participation 
of highly regarded sales representative and sales managers. CRM 
Exec sponsor
Steering committee
CEO
Sales exec Marketing exec
Program
team
Program director
Sales lead
Marketing lead
IS lead
Support lead
CRM consultant
Key users
Key users
Key users
External resources
Customer
advocate
Systems
implementer
 Figure 3.7 
      Governance 
structure
9    

===== PAGE 97 =====
 
74 Customer Relationship Management
implementations can impose considerable demands on your company’s 
own internal IT resources which might be called on to perform several 
project-related roles. The lead developer role ensures that the CRM 
software is customized to meet the needs of users. The database 
developer role ensures that customer-related data held in disparate 
databases is made available to end-users in the form required for 
operational and analytical CRM applications. The front-end developer 
role ensures that the user interface is easy to understand and use. 
   It is not uncommon for CRM projects to import resources and talents 
to help deliver the project. This governance structure will have a CRM 
consultant working with the steering committee. It is unlikely that 
an inhouse steering committee will have sufﬁ  cient experience of CRM 
project implementation. An experienced consultant can help the steering 
committee overcome problems as the project progresses. A systems 
implementer is also shown in this governance structure as an important 
external resource. For an installed CRM system, vendors generally 
supply technical help to ensure that the system is properly implemented. 
The implementer has a boundary-spanning role, being an employee of 
the vendor but working onsite as the client’s advocate. 
  A systems integrator may also be needed to align disparate systems into 
a coherent whole to support the project objectives. Systems integration 
can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 Systems integration is the practice of aligning and combining 
system components such as people, processes, technology and data 
for the achievement of deﬁ ned outcomes. 
   Very often desired CRM outcomes are impeded by the poor 
interoperability of IT systems. For example, the IT system that supports 
web operations may be incompatible with the IT system that supports 
the call centre. The result is that there may be two different databases 
containing important customer-related information. A systems integrator 
might be needed to programme the interface that links the two systems. 
  Finally, the governance chart shows that the voice of the customer has 
to be heard in the project team. Customers of companies that implement 
CRM are important stakeholders, because their experience of doing 
business will change. Some CRM projects fail to deliver optimal outcomes 
because the project team fails to ask  ‘ What would the customer think? ’
    Identify change management needs 
   Even small CRM projects can prove challenging in terms of change 
management. A sales-force automation project might involve centralizing 
data that is presently kept on individual representatives ’  computers 
and making that information available to everyone in the team. 
Representatives will need to learn to share. In a distributed sales-force, 
these representatives may not have even met each other. If they also 
have to change their selling methodology, record keeping and reporting 
habits, there might be some worries, if not outright resistance. 
  According to consultants Booz Allen  &  Hamilton,  ‘ Leadership teams 
that fail to plan for the human side of change often ﬁ  nd themselves 

===== PAGE 98 =====
 
Planning and implementing customer relationship management projects 75
wondering why their best-laid plans go awry ’ .10   They describe change 
both in terms of top-down leadership and bottom-up buy-in, as does 
John Kotter whose eight-step approach to managing change is widely 
cited and deployed.  11   The eight steps are as follows: 
    1.     create a sense of urgency so people begin to feel  ‘ we must do 
something ’
    2.     put together a guiding team to drive the change effort  
    3.     get the vision right, and build supporting strategies 
    4.     communicate for buy-in 
    5.     empower action by removing organizational barriers to change 
   6.     produce short-term wins to diffuse cynicism, pessimism and scepticism  
    7.     don’t let up, but keep driving change and promoting the vision  
    8.     make change stick by reshaping organizational culture. 
  Kotter emphasizes that successful change management programmes 
adopt a see–feel–change approach. To bring about change it is necessary 
not only to get people to see the need for change, but also to feel so 
emotionally engaged that they want to change. He stresses the importance 
of emotional engagement with the programme’s vision and strategies. 
    Organizational culture 
   The idea of organizational culture has been around for many years. In 
everyday language, organizational culture is what is being described 
when someone answers the question ‘ what is it like working here? ’  More 
formally, organizational culture can be deﬁ ned as: 
 A pattern of shared values and beliefs that help individuals 
understand organizational functioning and thus provide them with 
the norms for behavior in the organization.  
12
   Essentially, organizational culture is understood to comprise widely 
shared and strongly held values. These values are reﬂ  ected in patterns 
of individual and interpersonal behavior, including the behavior of 
the business leaders, and expressed in the norms, symbols, rituals and 
formal systems of the organization. 
  A number of studies indicate that organizational culture affects business 
performance.13   Recent research has also shown that organizational culture 
is a predictor of CRM success. 14   Adhocracy, one of four organizational 
cultures identiﬁ ed in the Competing Values model ( Figure 3.8   ), shows the 
strongest association with CRM success. Adhocracies are highly ﬂ  exible, 
entrepreneurial, externally-oriented organizations. Their core values are 
creativity and risk-taking. 
  Cameron and Quinn have developed a process for companies wishing 
to change their culture, as indicated by the Competing Values model. 
15
They suggest that cultural change may involve adjustment to the 
organization’s structure, symbols, systems, staff, strategy, style of leaders 
and skills of managers, but emphasize that individual behavioural change 
is the key to culture change. 

===== PAGE 99 =====
 
76 Customer Relationship Management
    Buy-in 
  As noted by John Kotter, buy-in operates at an emotional or intellectual 
(rational) level. Intellectual buy-in is where people know what has 
to be changed and understand the justiﬁ  cation for the change. New 
technologies are adopted more quickly when users believe that the 
system will be easy to use. Emotional buy-in is where there is genuine 
heartfelt enthusiasm, even excitement, about the change. The matrix in 
 Figure 3.9    shows the possibility of four employee segments, reﬂ  ecting 
the presence or absence of emotional and rational buy-in. Champions 
are emotionally and rationally committed. Weak links are neither 
emotionally nor rationally committed. Bystanders understand the 
changes being introduced, but feel no emotional buy-in to the change. 
Loose cannons are ﬁ red up with enthusiasm, but really don’t understand 
what they have to do to contribute to the change. All these segments will 
be found in major change projects such as a CRM implementation. 
Intellectual buy-in
Emotional buy-in
Yes
No
No Yes
Bystanders Champions
Loose
cannonsWeak links
 Figure 3.9 
      The buy-in matrix    
Flexibility and discretion
Internal focus and integration
External focus and differentiation
Stability and control
Clan Adhocracy
MarketHierarchy
 Figure 3.8 
      The Competing 
Values model of 
organizational
culture
16    

===== PAGE 100 =====
 
Planning and implementing customer relationship management projects 77
 Figure 3.10        Project Gantt chart17    
  The CRM project needs to be marketed to each of these groups 
in different ways. The programme team’s challenges are to stir-up 
bystanders to become passionate about the project’s goals, and to educate 
loose cannons on the reasoning behind CRM. Weak links can be truly 
problematic if they are in customer-facing roles or impact on customer 
experience. It has been said that it takes many years to win a customer’s 
conﬁ dence and trust, but only one incident to break it. If efforts to win 
them over fail, weak links may need to be reassigned to jobs where there 
is no customer impact. 
    Identify project management needs 
   CRM implementations can place considerable demands on project 
management skills. A CRM project plan spells out the steps that will get 
you from where you are now (customer strategy situation analysis) to 
where you want to be (CRM vision, goals and objectives), on time and 
within budget. The CRM programme director generally performs the 
project management role, but sometimes it is outsourced to a consultant. 
A project plan sets out the tasks to be performed, the order in which 
they are to be executed, the time each will take, the resources required 
to perform the tasks (including people and money) and the deliverables 
from each task. Tools such as Gantt charts (see  Figure 3.10   ), critical path 
analysis (CPA), programme evaluation and review techniques (PERT) 

===== PAGE 101 =====
 
78 Customer Relationship Management
or network diagrams are useful tools for project managers. Some tasks 
will be performed in parallel, some in sequence. As the project rolls 
forward there will be periodic  ‘ milestone ’  reviews to ensure that it is on 
time and on budget. A CRM project that has the goal of improving the 
productivity of marketing campaigns might be made up of a number 
of tasks or mini-projects, each with its own deliverable, including the 
following: market segmentation project, database development project, 
creation of a new campaign management process, management reports 
project, technology search and selection project, and a staff training 
project.  
    Identify critical success factors 
   Critical success factors (CSFs) are the  ‘ must haves ’  that underpin project 
success. Critical success factors can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 CSFs are attributes and variables that can signiﬁ  cantly impact 
business outcomes. 
   CRM consultants and vendors offer a range of opinions on CSFs, 
mentioning the following: a clear customer strategy that deﬁ  nes your 
company’s offers, markets and channels; an organizational culture that 
promotes coordination and information-sharing across business units; an 
agreed deﬁ nition of what counts as CRM success; executive sponsorship 
of the CRM programme’s objectives; availability and use of pertinent, 
accurate, timely and useable customer-related information; a clear 
focus on people and process issues, not only technology; starting small 
with quick wins that are then promoted within the company as success 
stories; focus on automating processes that have major implications for 
costs or customer experience; engagement of all stakeholders, including 
end-users and customers, in programme planning and roll-out. 
  There have been very few independent studies of CRM CSFs. Luis 
Mendoza and his colleagues conducted a qualitative study of CSFs that 
involved a panel of eight expert judges identifying 13 CSFs and 55 associated 
metrics covering people, process and technology aspects of CRM strategy.  18
The CSFs and their alignment with people, process and technology appear in 
 Table 3.1   , the most important being highlighted in bold. 
   Da Silva and Rahimi 19   conducted a single CRM case study test of 
three CSF models that had originally been developed in the context of 
enterprise resource planning (ERP) implementations. They found that 
CRM CSFs could be categorized as strategic and tactical. Strategic CSFs 
are encountered at the beginning of the project, while tactical CSFs 
become important later. Strategic CSFs include a clear CRM philosophy 
(we prefer the term  ‘ vision ’ ), top management commitment and project 
management expertise. Tactical CSFs include trouble-shooting skills, 
good communications and software conﬁ guration. 
   Croteau and Li conducted an empirical assessment of CRM CSFs in 
57 large Canadian organizations.  
20   Focusing only on the technology 
element – therefore ignoring people and process issues – they collected 
data about CRM’s impacts on customer satisfaction, retention, loyalty 

===== PAGE 102 =====
 
Planning and implementing customer relationship management projects 79
and market share, and looked for associations with a number of 
predeﬁ ned critical success factors. They conclude that the CSF most 
strongly associated with CRM success is an accurate and well-developed 
knowledge management system. This has to be supported by a suitable 
IT infrastructure which can capture, manage and deliver real time 
customer, product and service information in order to improve customer 
response and decision-making at all customer touchpoints. They also 
found that another important CSF is top management support.  
    Develop a risk management plan 
   It has been claimed that a large number of CRM projects, perhaps as 
many as two-thirds, fail. 21   Of course, there can be many potential causes 
of failure, ranging from inadequate project management to resistance 
of end-users to the adoption of new technologies. At this stage, you’ll 
be trying to identify the major risks to achieving the desired outcomes. 
Once identiﬁ ed, you can begin to put risk mitigation strategies and 
contingency plans in place. As you’d expect, some risks reﬂ  ect an 
absence of the CSFs identiﬁ  ed above. Gartner names a number of 
common causes of CRM failure: management that has little customer 
understanding or involvement; rewards and incentives that are tied 
to old, non-customer objectives; organizational culture that is not 
customer-focused; limited or no input from the customers; thinking 
that technology is the solution; lack of speciﬁ  cally designed, mutually 
reinforcing processes; poor-quality customer data and information; little 
coordination between departmental initiatives and projects; creation 
of the CRM team happening last, and the team lacks business staff; no 
measures or monitoring of beneﬁ ts and lack of testing.  
22
   Critical success factor People  Process  Technology 
    1 .    Senior management commitment  X 
    2.  Creation of a multidisciplinary team  X  X 
    3. Objectives deﬁ  nition  X 
    4.  Interdepartmental integration  X  X 
    5.  Communication of the CRM strategy to staff  X  X   
    6. Staff commitment  X 
    7.   Customer information management   X 
    8. Customer service  X  X 
    9. Sales automation  X  X 
   10.   Marketing automation  X  X 
   11.   Support for operational management  X  X  X 
   12.  Customer contact management  X  X 
   13.  Information systems integration  X 
  (Note: more important CSF’s are bold typeface)  Table 3.1        Critical 
success factors for 
successful CRM 
strategies  

===== PAGE 103 =====
 
80 Customer Relationship Management
  Risk mitigation strategies are your responses to these risks. Let’s take 
the risk of management having little or no customer understanding. How 
might you respond to this? There are a number of things you could do – 
management could work in the front-line serving customers (McDonalds ’  
executives do this), listen in to call centre interactions for at least one hour 
a week or mystery shop your own and competitor organizations. 
    Phase 3: Needs speciﬁ cation 
and partner selection 
   Having built the CRM project foundations, the next phase involves 
specifying needs and selecting suitable partners. 
    Process mapping and reﬁ nement 
   The ﬁ rst task of Phase 3 is to identify business processes that need 
attention – making them more effective or efﬁ  cient or ﬂ  agging them as 
candidates for automation. Business processes can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 A business process is set of activities performed by people and/or 
technology in order to achieve a desired outcome. 
   Put more simply, business processes are how things get done by your 
company. Processes can be classiﬁ  ed in several ways: vertical and 
horizontal; front and back-ofﬁ ce; primary and secondary. 
Vertical  processes are those that are located entirely within a business 
function. For example, the customer acquisition process might reside 
totally within the marketing department. 
Horizontal  processes are cross-functional. New product development 
processes are typically horizontal and span sales, marketing, ﬁ nance and 
research and development functions. 
Front-ofﬁ ce  (or front-stage) processes are those that customers 
encounter. The complaints handling process is an example. 
Back-ofﬁ ce  (or back-stage) processes are invisible to customers, for 
example, the procurement process. Many processes straddle both front 
and back-ofﬁ ces: the order-fulﬁ  lment process (see  Figure 3.11   ) is an 
example. The order taking part of that process sits in the front-ofﬁ ce. The 
production scheduling part is back-ofﬁ ce. 
   A distinction is also made between primary and secondary processes. 
Primary  processes have major cost implications for companies or, given 
their impact on customer experience, major revenue implications. The 
logistics process in courier organizations – from picking up a package, 
through moving the package, to delivering the package – constitutes 
about 90 per cent of the cost base of the business, and is therefore a 
primary process. Customers may have a different perspective on what is 
important. They typically do not care about back-ofﬁ  ce processes. They 
care about the processes that touch them. In the insurance industry these 

===== PAGE 104 =====
 
Planning and implementing customer relationship management projects 81
Finance Sales Logistics
Back orders
Yes No
Goods despatched?
Raise export invoice
Order received
Credit OK?No YesCredit check
Release orders? Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Invoice released
Export order?
Electronic invoice sent Manual invoice sent
Invoice sentEDI order?
Review order
Order input
Print pick slip
Pick
Autorise pick
Confirm shipment
 Figure 3.11        Order fulﬁ lment process    
are the claims process, the policy renewal process and the new policy 
purchase process. In the courier business they are the pick-up, delivery 
and tracking processes. 
Secondary  processes have minor implications for costs or revenues, or 
little impact on customer experience. 
   Strategic CRM aims to build an organization that is designed to create 
and deliver customer value consistently better than its competitors. 
Designing processes that create value for customers is clearly vital to 
this outcome. 3M’s mission is  ‘ to solve unsolved problems innovatively ’ . 
It does this in part through new product development processes that are 
designed to identify good ideas and bring them to the market quickly.  
23
For 3       M, the innovation process is a primary process that enables the 
company to differentiate itself from its competitors. 
   Operational CRM involves the automation of the company’s selling, 
marketing and service processes, and generally requires the support of 
analytical CRM. Figure 3.12    shows the campaign management process 
for a particular customer offer made by First Direct, a UK-based 
telephone bank. It shows that the propensity of a customer to open a 
high interest savings account is determined by a scoring process that 
considers both demographic and transactional data. The propensity 

===== PAGE 105 =====
 
82 Customer Relationship Management
modelling process is an illustration of analytical CRM. If a target score 
is reached an offer is made, either by the customer service agent during 
a phone call or at a later time by mail. This automation of the selling 
process is an example of operational CRM. 
   Flowcharting, which is also known as blueprinting and process 
mapping, is a tool that can be used to make processes visible. The 
ﬂ owchart sets out the steps involved in performing the process. It may 
also identify the people (or roles) that contribute to the process, and the 
standards by which the process is measured, such as time, accuracy or 
cost. Processes always have customers, who may be either internal or 
external to a company. Customers receive process outputs.  Figure 3.11  
shows the order fulﬁ lment process for an exporter. The ﬂ  owchart shows 
that the process is cross-functional and is completed by a number of 
internal supplier–customer relationships in series. 
   Software such as Microsoft Visio, ABC Flowcharter and ConceptDraw 
is readily available to help generate process ﬂ  owcharts. Major vendors 
and consultants may use their own proprietary applications. Oracle, 
for example uses Oracle Designer which allows them to model 
processes and generate the associated software code. Flowcharts can 
be used to identify fail points where a process frequently breaks down, 
redundancies and duplications. They can also be used for induction and 
training of new people and for illustrating internal customer–supplier 
relationships. Processes can be rated according to the degree to which 
they can be improved. It has been suggested, for example, that processes 
be rated according to the criteria in  Table 3.2   .
Customer phones in 
Check scores
Offer product to
high scores 
Send application
form
Mail follow-up
Do nothing
Open account on
phone
Check account
balance
(Numbers are days)
No interest
Buy product
42
2
7
7
Out bound phone
follow-up
 Figure 3.12 
      Campaign 
management
process for high 
interest savings 
account    

===== PAGE 106 =====
 
Planning and implementing customer relationship management projects 83
    Data review and gap analysis 
   Having identiﬁ ed processes that require attention, the next step is to 
review the data requirements for the CRM implementation and to 
identify shortfalls. 
  Strategic CRM uses customer-related data to identify which customers to 
target for acquisition, retention and development, and what to offer them. 
Operational CRM uses customer-related data in the everyday running 
of the business, for example in handling billing queries in the contact 
centre or mounting campaigns in the marketing department. Analytical 
CRM uses customer-related data to answer questions such as ‘who are 
our most proﬁ table customers’ and ‘which customers are most likely to 
churn’?. Collaborative CRM uses customer-related data to enable channel 
partners to target their communications more precisely. The fundamental 
issue companies have to ask is: what customer-related data do we need for 
strategic, operational, analytical and collaborative CRM purposes? 
  Members of the programme team should be well placed to answer the 
question  ‘ what information is needed? ’  For example, the programme 
team’s marketing lead would be expected to appreciate the information 
needs of direct marketers running event-based campaigns. Typically, 
these marketers want to know response rates to previous mailings broken 
down by customer group, the content of those offers, sales achieved by the 
mailings and the number of items returned unopened. They would also 
want to know the names and addresses of selected targets, their preferred 
method of communication (mail? e-mail? phone?), their preferred form of 
salutation (ﬁ rst name? Mr? Ms?) and the offers that have been successful 
in the past. In a globalized business world, it is important to respect 
cultural connections. 
  At this stage of planning the CRM project, you are identifying the 
data that is needed for CRM purposes and creating an inventory of data 
that is available for these purposes. The gap between what is available 
and what is needed may be quite signiﬁ  cant. A useful distinction can 
be made between ‘ need-to-know ’  and  ‘ like-to-know ’  that is, between 
information needed for CRM purposes and information that might 
be useful at some future point. Given the costs of developing and 
 Process rating 
    Best practice 
(superiority)  
 The process is substantially defect-free and contributes to CRM performance. 
Process is superior to comparable competitors and other benchmarks 
    Parity   A good process which largely contributes to CRM performance 
    Stability   An average process which meets expectations with no major problems, but which 
presents opportunities for improvement 
    Recoverability   The process has identiﬁ  ed weaknesses which are being addressed 
    Criticality   An ineffective and/or inefﬁ  cient process in need of immediate remedial attention 
Table 3.2        Evaluating 
processes  24    

===== PAGE 107 =====
 
84 Customer Relationship Management
maintaining customer-related databases, companies need to be rigorous 
in screening data requirements.  
    Initial technology needs speciﬁ cation and 
research alternative solutions 
   Earlier in this process you began to consider technology requirements. 
Now you can return to this question with a clearer focus on the process 
and data issues. There are a huge number of software applications that 
fall under the heading of CRM. They are shown in  Figure 3.13   . You need 
to decide what applications will deliver your CRM vision and meet 
the business case requirements. You can learn about these applications 
by visiting vendor websites, joining online communities such as www.
customerthink.com , or attending physical or virtual (online) exhibitions. 
There is more coverage on IT issues in Chapters 13–16 of this book. 
Chapter 13 presents an overview of IT for CRM, and Chapters 14, 15 
Sales force automation
Lead management
Sales configuration
Order management
Pricing management
Sales compensation
Sales performance management
Sales
Field service 
Information/
infrastructure
Customer
service
E-Commerce
Analytics
Segmentation
Campaign management
E-marketing
Lead management
Loyalty management
Marketing resource management
Enterprise marketing management
Marketing performance management
Partner marketing
Data mining
Performance management
Dashboards/KPIs
Personal productivity
Customer value analysis
Sales, Service, Web
Field service analytics
In-line, Event driven
Marketing
Community management
Service analytics
Desktop productivity
Contact center/Call center
Workforce optimization
   • E-Learning
   • Workforce management
   • Q/A, Monitoring
Self-Service/E-Service
   • Knowledge management
   • E-Mail response
   • Surveys
Unified communications
Trouble ticketing/Case 
management
Enterprise feedback
management
Field force optimization
Wireless mobility
Parts planning
Contract/Warranty
Remote monitoring
Fleet management
Dispatch and repair
CRM
Application
Mind Map
Web storefront
Catalog, Pricing
Inventory
Sales partner management
Customer data integration: CDI
Product information
management: PIM
Business process management
Master data management: MDM
Enterprise information management
 Figure 3.13        CRM applications (Source: Gartner Inc)    

===== PAGE 108 =====
 
Planning and implementing customer relationship management projects 85
and 16 review sales-force automation, marketing automation and service 
automation respectively. 
  A decision has to be made about whether to build, buy or rent the 
CRM applications that are chosen. Your options are to build your CRM 
applications from scratch, to buy an on-premise site licence or pay a 
monthly per-user charge for an on-demand solution. If you opt to build 
from scratch you may ﬁ  nd that some open source modules provide 
much or all of what you need. Open source software is peer-reviewed 
software that gives CRM application developers the opportunity to view 
and evaluate source code. Open source advocates suggest that being able 
to modify source code leads to improved software with fewer bugs, and 
that free distribution leads to more developers working to improve the 
software. The second alternative is to license CRM applications. Yearly 
licence fees typically vary according to the number of users. Licence fees 
give you the right to use the CRM software, but additional costs may 
be incurred for CRM application support and maintenance, training, 
customization, integration, IT infrastructure and end-user support. The 
ﬁ nal alternative is to pay a monthly per-user cost for an on-demand 
solution which generally includes implementation, maintenance, 
training, support and application management services delivered 
directly by the application vendor. Most companies opt for either hosted 
(on-demand) or installed (on-premise) solutions.  
    Hosted or on-premise CRM 
   One important decision is how to access CRM functionality. CRM 
software is distributed in two ways. It can be installed on your 
company’s own servers or it can be accessed from another party’s servers 
via the Internet. The former is known as on-premise, ofﬂ  ine or installed 
CRM, an option that has been the preferred mode for many large-scale 
enterprises and early adopters. The alternative is known as hosted or 
online CRM, web-service, the ASP (Application Service Provider) model 
or the Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) model. 
   The hosted option is becoming more popular as CRM solutions 
are adopted by mid-market and smaller enterprises. Some larger 
organizations are also opting for online CRM solutions particularly for 
tactical or departmental-level issues, and many enterprises are using a 
hybrid mix of hosted and on-premise solutions, which is feasible when 
the underlying data model is the same.  
25
   SaaS vendors deliver and manage applications and other services from 
remote sites to multiple users via the Internet. The software is installed 
on the ASP’s servers or those of their partners. For example, Siebel’s 
hosting partner is IBM. Access is on a pay-as-you-go or subscription 
basis. Some vendors offer a variety of options for their software. Oracle 
sells both on-premise and hosted versions of siebel CRM. Stayinfront 
sells on-premise owner-operated, on-premise hosted (whereby the 
software is on your site but managed by Stayinfront) and off-site hosted 
versions. Some vendors offer a ‘peppercorn’ arrangement whereby, after 
several years of rental, the software can be purchased for a token sum. 
  In the early days, hosted CRM applications offered much less 
functionality than their on-premise competitors. Currently, the gap is 

===== PAGE 109 =====
 
86 Customer Relationship Management
closing. Some SaaS vendors are providing advanced functionality for 
competitive intelligence, pricing, content management, data warehousing 
and analytics, and workﬂ ow design. 
26
   There are a number of players in hosted CRM, some of whom are 
shown in  Table 3.3   .  
   Hosted CRM vendor url
   Salesforce.com   http://www.salesforce.com/  
   Siebel Systems   http://www.crmondemand.com/  
   Red CRM   http://redcrm.com/
   Sugar CRM   http://www.sugarcrm.com  
   Entellium CRM Solutions   http://www.entellium.com/  
   SalesLogix  http://www.saleslogix.com/home/default.php3 
   Soffront Software Inc.   http://www.soffront.com/  
   RightNow Technologies   http://www.rightnow.com/  
   NetSuite  http://www.netsuite.com/portal/products/crm_plus/main.shtml 
   Oracle  http://www.oracle.com/ondemand/ebso.html 
   Aplicor Inc.   http://www.aplicor.com/  
Table 3.3        Hosted 
CRM vendors  
  It is widely claimed that there are signiﬁ  cant cost advantages to the 
hosted model. Costs are ﬁ  xed and known. Companies pay a per-user 
monthly fee. If you have 50 users, and the monthly fee is $100 per user, 
you can expect annual user fees of $60 000. Upgrades are performed by the 
vendor away from the users ’  premises. On-premise implementations, in 
contrast, can impose signiﬁ cant burdens on in-house IT staff and budgets. 
There can be upfront investments in IT hardware and infrastructure, 
software purchase and customization, and training. Implementation costs 
can be signiﬁ cant. User support and software upgrade costs are additional 
to initial software licence costs. Essentially, the hosted model converts 
capital expenditure and ﬁ xed costs into variable costs. Hosted CRM costs 
have fallen to US$50 per user per month, and are expected to fall further 
as the growth in the market attracts new vendors. 
   One analysis has compared the total costs of ownership (TCO) of 
installed and hosted sales-force automation, using a hypothetical 500-
user installation. 
27   The TCO of the installed solution was eight times 
that of the hosted solution in year one ( Table 3.4   ); in subsequent years 
the relative costs appear to even out, largely because the hosted solution 
requires clients to pay monthly or annual subscription fees based on the 
number of users. 
  Additional research by the Meta Group indicates that hosted CRM has 
a cost advantage in the ﬁ rst three years, but thereafter the annual charges 
incurred make on-premise solutions a more attractive proposition. They 
conclude:
  ‘ for a typical mid-market on-premises CRM application, total ﬁ  rst 
year costs are nearly 50 per cent more than for a typical ﬁ  rst year 
hosted application. However, a different picture emerges when costs 

===== PAGE 110 =====
 
Planning and implementing customer relationship management projects 87
   Cost item  On-premise CRM  Hosted CRM 
   Number of users  500  500 
   Application licence/subscription  $1 250 000  $750 000 
   Implementation and customization  $6 250 000  $187 000 
   Training  $150 000  $75 000 
   IT infrastructure/hardware  $500 000  $0 
   IT personnel  $500 000  $0 
   Support/upgrade costs  $225 000  $0 
    Year one expenditure  $8 875 000  $1 012 500  
  Sources: Triple Tree; Software  &  Information Industry Association (SIAA); salesforce.com; Yankee Group. 
Table originally appeared in eMarketer 2005.  
Table 3.4        Hosted 
versus installed 
CRM – ﬁ  rst year 
costs for a 500-user 
deployment  
are projected over a few years  …  When long term costs are analysed, 
hosted products approach an equivalent total cost of ownership 
(TCO) to that of on-premise products in approximately three years. 
Beyond this time, a hosted TCO will exceed an on-premise TCO ’ .
28
  A contrary analysis, conducted by the Yankee Group, estimated that 
the TCO of an on-premise solution is almost 60 per cent higher over a 
ﬁ ve year period. 29   These conﬂ icting results point to the need for CRM 
adopters to conduct their own TCO analysis. 
  You will also need to consider hardware issues. What types of 
hardware are required by sales, service and marketing users? Perhaps 
salespeople need a personal digital assistant (PDA) for easy portability, 
whereas marketing people will be satisﬁ  ed with a desktop computer. 
Mobile road warriors in remote locations may require both a laptop in 
their home ofﬁ ce and a PDA on the road.  Table 3.5    offers a comparison 
of PDA and laptop attributes. 
  You now need to ﬁ nalize your thinking about systems integration. For 
example, you might want your CRM system to ‘ talk to ’  or share data 
with back-end systems for ﬁ  nance, inventory management and order 
processing. You might want it to integrate with other third-party systems 
that provide added functionality for sales, marketing and service staff. 
For example, your marketing people might want integration with a 
mapping system, while salespeople might want integration with a global 
positioning system.  
    Write request for proposals (RFP) 
   Before calling for proposals you need to write a detailed RFP . This 
document becomes the standard against which vendors’ proposals are 
evaluated. It summarizes your thinking about the CRM programme and 
invites interested parties to respond in a structured way. Typical contents 
of the RFP include: 
     1.     Instructions to respondents  
     2.     Company background 

===== PAGE 111 =====
 
88 Customer Relationship Management
     3.     The CRM vision and strategy 
   4.     Strategic, operational, analytical and collaborative CRM requirements  
     5.     Process issues: 
     a.     customer interaction mapping 
     b.     process re-engineering.     
     6.     Technology issues: 
     a.     delivery model – SaaS, on-premise, blended 
     b.     functionality required – sales, marketing and service 
     c.     management reports required 
     d.     hardware requirements and performance measures  
     e.     architectural issues 
     f.      systems integration issues 
     g.     customization requirements 
     h.     upgrades and service requirements. 
     7.     People issues: 
     a.     project management services 
     b.     change management services 
     c.     management and staff training. 
     8.     Costing issues – TCO targets 
     9.     Implementation issues – pilot, training, support, roll-out, timeline 
    10.     Contractual issues 
    11.     Criteria for assessing proposals  
    12.     Timeline for responding to proposals. 
    Call for proposals 
   The next step is to invite potential partners to respond to the RFP . You’ll 
see from the RFP contents that CRM projects sometimes require input 
from several process, people and technology partners. On the technology 
side, if your company is already paying for CRM modules as part of its 
enterprise IT system, you’ll certainly want to add this technology vendor 
to the list of those invited to respond. Between three and six potential 
technology vendors are typically invited. 
   Attribute Laptop PDA 
   Content  Full  Narrow 
   Size  XXXX  X 
   Portability  Moderate  High 
   Start time  Moderate  Fast 
   Speed of input  Fast  Slow 
   Dialogue barrier  Yes  No 
   Stickiness  Moderate  High 
   Walk and use  No  Yes 
   Presentations  Excellent  Good 
   Replacement cost  High  Moderate 
   Synchronization  Good  Excellent 
  (Source: Customer Connect Australia)  
Table 3.5        
Comparing laptops 
and PDAs  

===== PAGE 112 =====
 
Planning and implementing customer relationship management projects 89
    Revised technology needs identiﬁ cation 
   Proposals from technology vendors will sometimes identify 
opportunities for improved CRM performance that you may not have 
considered. Perhaps there is some functionality or an issue that you had 
not considered. For example, you might not have considered the need 
to provide implementation support to sales representatives in the ﬁ  eld. 
A vendor who indicates that they’ll be able to help representatives learn 
the new technology in remote locations might be very attractive. 
    Assessment and partner selection 
   The next stage is to assess the proposals and select one or more partners. 
This task is generally performed by an evaluation team formed for this 
purpose and reporting to the steering committee. Assessment is made 
easier if you have a structured RFP and scoring system. There are two 
types of scoring system – unweighted and weighted. An unweighted 
system simply treats each assessment variable as equally important. A 
weighted system acknowledges that some variables are more important 
than others. These are accorded more signiﬁ cance in the scoring process.   
  Evaluation and selection should involve more than just the written 
vendor proposals. Short-listed vendors should be invited to demonstrate 
their solutions in relevant scenaries. Vendors may be required to provide 
proof-of-concept for technical solutions such as e-mail integration or 
mobile synchronization. Finally, preferred vendors should be subject to 
reference checks. The results of all these inputs are then scored to support 
the ﬁ nal decision. 
    Phase 4: Project 
implementation
   By now, you have developed the CRM strategy, built the CRM project 
foundations, speciﬁ ed your needs and selected one or more partners. It 
is now implementation time! 
    Reﬁ ne project plan 
   The ﬁ rst step of Phase 4 requires you to cooperate with your selected 
partners in reﬁ  ning the project plan. Remember, this was originally 
deﬁ ned without consideration of the needs and availability of your 
partners. You may ﬁ  nd that your partner’s consultants are already 
committed to other projects and that you’ll have to wait. Your partners 
will be able to help you set new milestones and reﬁ ne the budget.  
    Identify technology customization needs 
  It is very common that off-the-shelf technology fails to meet all the 
requirements of users. Some vendors have industry-speciﬁ  c versions 
of their CRM software. Oracle, for example, offers a range of CRM suites 
for banking, retail, public sector and other verticals. Even so, some 

===== PAGE 113 =====
 
90 Customer Relationship Management
customization is often required. The lead developer, database developer and 
front-end developer, in partnership with vendors, can perform these roles. 
  Customization needs are typically speciﬁ  ed using a gap analysis 
approach. The required business process is supplied to the vendor, who 
(after some preparation) presents how this process is supported in the 
software. Any gaps are highlighted for subsequent analysis and action. This 
continues until all business processes have been examined. The resultant 
gap register is then assessed, priorities are established and customization 
of their software and/or modiﬁ cation of the business process begins. 
   Customization raises problems of ownership of Intellectual Property 
that both vendors and clients will want to reslove. Vendors have invested 
millions, perhaps billions, of dollars to create, code, test and protect their 
product. The view of most software companies is that they will maintain 
the rights to any customized code and the right to incorporate it into 
future releases of the software. It is not unusual for a client’s legal team 
to contest this position. 
    Prototype design, test, modify and roll-out 
  The output of this customization process will be a prototype that can be 
tested by users on a duplicated set, or a dummy set, of customer-related 
data. End-user tests will show whether further customization is required. 
Final adjustments to marketing, selling and service processes are made 
at this stage, and further training needs are identiﬁ  ed and met. After a 
ﬁ nal review, a roll-out programme is implemented. In larger companies 
this often is a phased roll-out. For example, a new sales-force automation 
system might be rolled out ﬁ rst to the  ‘ champions ’ , those identiﬁ ed earlier 
as buying in both emotionally and rationally. A new service automation 
solution might be rolled out to newly acquired customers ﬁ rst, before the 
existing customer base is imported. The idea is to iron out any problems 
before company-wide adoption. 
    Phase 5: Evaluate 
performance
   The ﬁ nal phase of the CRM project involves an evaluation of its 
performance. How well has it performed? Two sets of variables can be 
measured: project outcomes and business outcomes. Project outcomes 
focus on whether the project has been delivered on time and to budget. 
Your evaluation of the business outcomes requires you to return to the 
project objectives, your deﬁ nition of CRM success and the business case, 
and ask whether the desired results have been achieved. 
  If your single goal was to enhance customer retention rates, with 
a measurable lift from 70 to 80 per cent, and this is accomplished then 
your CRM project has been successful. Congratulations! However, most 
projects have multiple objectives and it is common for some objectives 
to be achieved while others are not. Lead conversion by the sales team 
might rise, but lead generation by campaign managers might fall 

===== PAGE 114 =====
 
Planning and implementing customer relationship management projects 91
  References  
       1.         The content in this section is drawn from a number of sources. 
Important contributions are made by John Turnbull, Managing 
Director of Customer Connect ( www.customerconnect.com.au ) and 
Gartner Inc. ( www.gartner.com ).      
       2.         Copyright©2008. Customer Connect Australia. Used with 
permission.
       3.         See  http://www.theidm.com/index.cfm?fuseAction     /H11005     contentDispla
y. & chn     /H11005     3 & tpc     /H11005     149 . Accessed 25 June 2007. 
       4.         See  http://www.marketingpower.com/content24634.php . Accessed 
25 June 2007. 
       5.          http://blogs.salesforce.com/ask_wendy/files/how_to_create_
your_crm_vision_5.16.05.PDF . Accessed 26 June 2007. 
       6.          www.gartner.com .      
       7.         Copyright©2008. Customer Connect Australia. Used with 
permission.
 8 Davis, F.D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, ease of use and user 
acceptance of information technology. MIS Quarterly, Vol. 13(3), pp. 
319–339.
       9.         Copyright©2008. Customer Connect Australia. Used with 
permission.
        Summary      
   In this chapter, you’ve learned about the ﬁ  ve major phases of a CRM implementation, 
and the processes and tools that are used to ensure that CRM projects deliver what is 
expected of them. The key phases are: 
    1.   Develop the CRM strategy  
    2.   Build the CRM project foundations  
    3.   Specify needs and select partner  
    4.   Implement project  
    5.   Evaluate performance.    
   CRM projects vary in scope, duration and cost, but it is always important to be clear 
about what business outcomes are desired and to measure the performance of the CRM 
implementation accordingly.       
short of objectives. A critical issue concerns the timing of any business 
performance evaluation. It can take users several months to become 
familiar with new processes and competent in using new technology. 
Periodic measures of business outcomes can be taken over time, to ensure 
that the programme outcomes are achieved. Ongoing training, timed to 
coincide with software upgrades, can enhance business outcomes.

===== PAGE 115 =====
 
92 Customer Relationship Management
      10.          http://www.boozallen.de/media/file/guiding_principles.pdf .
Accessed 27 June 2007. 
      11.          Kotter ,    J.P .   and   Cohen ,    D.S.             ( 2002 )        The heart of change: real-life stories of 
how people change their organizations             .  Boston, MA :       Harvard Business 
School Press              .   
12    .          Deshpandé ,    R.   and   Webster ,    F.E.     Jr.                ( 1989 )        Organizational culture and 
marketing: deﬁ ning the research agenda .            Journal of Marketing       , Vol.  53         , 
pp. 3  –       15      ,  January     .  
      13.          Deshpandé ,    R.  ,   Farley ,   J.U.   and   Webster ,   F.E.     Jr.                ( 1993 )        Corporate 
culture, customer orientation, and innovativeness in Japanese ﬁ  rms: 
a quadrad analysis .             Journal of Marketing       , Vol.  57         , pp.  23  –       37      ,  January     .  
      14.         Iriana, R. and Buttle, F. (in press). The impacts of organizational 
culture on customer relationship management outcomes . International 
Journal of Research in Marketing .       
      15.          Cameron ,   K.S.   and   Quinn ,    R.E.             ( 1999 )        Diagnosing and changing 
organisational culture             .  Reading, MA :       Addison Wesley              .  
      16.          Cameron ,   K.S.   and   Quinn ,    R.E.             ( 1999 )        Diagnosing and changing 
organisational culture             .  Reading, MA :       Addison Wesley              .  
      17.          Copyright©2008. SeedCode LLC. Used with permission .      
      18.          Mendoza ,    L.E.  ,   Marius ,    A.  ,   Perez ,    M.   and   Griman ,    A.C.                ( 2007 ) 
       Critical success factors for a CRM strategy .            Information and Software 
Technology       , Vol.  49         , pp.  913  –       945        .  
      19.          Da Silva ,    R.V .   and   Rahimi ,    I.D.                ( 2007 )        A critical success factor model 
for CRM implementation .             International Journal of Electronic Customer 
Relationship Management       , Vol.  1      ( 1 )       , pp.  3  –       15        .  
      20.          Croteau ,    A.-M.   and   Li ,    P .                ( 2003 )        Critical success factors of CRM 
technological initiatives .             Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences        ,  
Vol.  20      ( 1 )       , pp.  21  –       34        .  
      21.         Buttle, F. and Ang, L. (2004) ROI on CRM: a customer journey approach. 
 http://www.crm2day.com/library/EpFlupuEZVRmkpZCHM.php ; 
Davids, M. (1999) How to avoid the 10 biggest mistakes in CRM. 
Journal of Business Strategy , November–December, pp. 22–26. 
      22.          www.gartner.com       
      23.          Treacy ,    M.   and   Wiersema ,    F.             ( 1995 )        The discipline of market leaders             .  
 London :       Harper Collins              .  
      24.         Adapted from Jones, P .A. and Williams, T. (1995)  Business
improvement made simple . Northampton: Aegis Publishing.      
      25.         A data model is an abstract description of how data is organized in 
an information system or database. 
      26.         For a review of hosted CRM, refer to Buttle, F. (2006) Hosted CRM: 
literature review and research questions. Macquarie Graduate School 
of Management, working paper 2006–1. 
      27.         eMarketer. (2005)  CRM Spending and Trends .  http://www.emarketer.
com/Report.aspx?crm_aug05 . Accessed 21 August 2005. 
      28.         Meta Group. (2004) Hosted CRM: the real cost.  http://www.
metagroup.com/us/displayArticle.do?oid     /H11005     47816 . Accessed 11 
November 2005. 
      29.         Kane, R. (2004) The top 10 myths of hosted CRM.  http://www.aplicor.
com/4%20Company/10%20Myths%20of%20Hosted%20CRM% 
20Whitepaper.pdf . Accessed 20 October 2005. 

===== PAGE 116 =====
 
                Developing, 
managing and using 
customer-related 
databases  
 Chapter 4 

===== PAGE 117 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 118 =====
 
           Chapter objectives      
   By the end of this chapter, you will understand: 
    1.   the central role of customer-related databases to the successful delivery of CRM 
outcomes  
    2.   the importance of high quality data to CRM performance  
    3.   the issues that need to be considered in developing a customer-related database  
    4.   what data integration contributes to CRM performance  
    5.   the purpose of a data warehouse and data mart  
    6.   how data access can be obtained by CRM users  
    7.   the data protection and privacy issues that concern public policy makers.         
    Introduction 
  In this chapter we discuss the importance of developing an intimate 
knowledge and understanding of customers. This is essential to achieving 
CRM success. Strategic CRM, which focuses on winning and keeping 
proﬁ table customers, relies on customer-related data to identify which 
customers to target, win and keep. Operational CRM, which focuses on 
the automation of customer-facing processes such as selling, marketing 
and customer service, needs customer-related data to be able to deliver 
excellent service, run successful marketing campaigns and track sales 
opportunities. Analytical CRM mines customer-related data for strategic 
or tactical purposes. Collaborative CRM involves the sharing of customer-
related data with organizational partners, with a view to enhancing 
company, partner and customer value. Customer-related databases are the 
foundation for the execution of CRM strategy. Proﬁ  ciency at acquiring, 
enhancing, storing, distributing and using customer-related data is critical 
to CRM performance. 
    What is a customer-related 
database?
  You may have already noted that this chapter is not about customer 
databases. Rather, it is about customer-related databases. Why? 
Companies typically do not have a single customer database; instead, they 
have a number of customer-related databases. Large organizations, such 
as ﬁ nancial services companies, can have 20 or more customer systems, 
each with a separate database. These databases capture customer-related 
data from a number of different perspectives. Customer-related databases 

===== PAGE 119 =====
 
96 Customer Relationship Management
might be maintained in a number of functional areas – sales, marketing, 
service, logistics and accounts – each serving different operational 
purposes. Respectively, these databases might record quite different 
customer-related data – opportunities, campaigns, enquiries, deliveries 
and billing. Customer-related data might also be maintained by different 
channel managers – company-owned retail stores, third-party retail outlets 
and online retail, for example. Similarly, different product managers might 
maintain their own customer-related data. Customer-related data can have 
a current, past or future perspective, focusing upon current opportunities, 
historic sales or potential opportunities. Customer-related data might be 
about individual customers, customer cohorts, customer segments, market 
segments or entire markets. They might also contain product information, 
competitor information, regulatory data or anything else pertinent to the 
development and maintenance of customer relationships. 
    Developing a customer-
related database 
   Most databases share a common structure of ﬁ les, records and ﬁ elds (also 
called tables, rows and columns). Files (tables) hold information on a 
single topic such as customers, products, transactions or service requests. 
Each ﬁ le (table) contains a number of records (rows). Each record (row) 
contains a number of elements of data. These elements are arranged in 
common sets of ﬁ elds (columns) across the table. The modern customer-
related database therefore resembles a spreadsheet. There are six major 
steps in building a customer-related database, as shown in  Figure 4.1   .
1
1. Define the database functions
2. Define the information requirements
3. Identify the information sources
4. Select the database technology and hardware platform
5. Populate the database
6. Maintain the database
 Figure 4.1 
      Building a customer-
related database    

===== PAGE 120 =====
 
Developing, managing and using customer-related databases 97
    Deﬁ ne the database functions 
   Databases support the four forms of CRM – strategic, operational, 
analytical and collaborative. 
  Strategic CRM needs data about markets, market offerings, customers, 
channels, competitors, performance and potential to be able to identify 
which customers to target for customer acquisition, retention and 
development, and what to offer them. Collaborative CRM implementations 
generally use the operational and analytical data as described below, 
so that partners in distribution channels can align their efforts to serve 
end-customers. 
   Customer-related data is necessary for both operational and analytical 
CRM purposes. 
   Operational CRM uses customer-related data to help in the everyday 
running of the business. For example: 
●      a telecoms customer service representative (CSR) needs to access a 
customer record when she receives a telephone query  
●      a hotel receptionist needs access to a guest’s history so that she can 
reserve the preferred type of room – smoking or non-smoking, standard 
or de-luxe 
●      a salesperson needs to check a customer’s payment history to ﬁ nd out 
whether the account has reached the maximum credit limit. 
  Analytical CRM uses customer-related data to support the marketing, 
sales and service decisions that aim to enhance the value created for and 
from customers. For example: 
●      the telecoms company might want to target a retention offer to 
customers who are signalling an intention to switch to a different 
supplier
●      the hotel company might want to promote a weekend break to 
customers who have indicated their complete delight in previous 
customer satisfaction surveys  
●      a sales manager might want to compute his sales representatives ’
customer proﬁ tability, given the level of service that is being provided.    
   Customer-related data are typically organized into two subsets, 
reﬂ ecting these operational and analytical purposes. Operational 
data resides in an OLTP (online transaction processing) database, 
and analytical data resides in an OLAP (online analytical processing) 
database. The information in the OLAP database is normally a 
summarized, restructured, extract of the OLTP database, sufﬁ  cient to 
perform the analytical tasks. The analytical database might also draw in 
data from a number of internal and external sources. OLTP data needs to 
be very accurate and up to date. When a customer calls a contact centre 
to enquire about an invoice, it is no use the CSR telling the customer 
what the average invoice is for a customer in her postcode. The customer 
wants personal, accurate, contemporary, information. OLAP databases 
can perform well with less current data.  

===== PAGE 121 =====
 
98 Customer Relationship Management
    Deﬁ ne the information requirements 
   The people best placed to answer the question  ‘ what information is 
needed? ’  are those who interact or communicate with customers for 
sales, marketing and service purposes, and those who have to make 
strategic CRM decisions. 
  A direct marketer who is planning an e-mail campaign might want 
to know open and click-through rates, and click-to-open rates (CTOR) 
for previous e-campaigns, broken down by target market, offer and 
execution. She would also want to know e-mail addresses, e-mail 
preferences (html or plain text), and preferred salutation (ﬁ  rst name? 
Mr? Ms?). Operational and analytical needs like these help deﬁ  ne the 
contents of customer-related databases. 
   Senior managers reviewing your company’s strategic CRM decisions 
will require a completely different set of information. They may want to 
know the following. How is the market segmented? Who are our current 
customers? What do they buy? Who else do they buy from? What are 
our customers ’  requirements, expectations and preferences across all 
components of the value proposition, including product, service, channel 
and communication? 
   With the advent of packaged CRM applications, much of the database 
design work has been done by the software vendors. The availability of 
industry-speciﬁ c CRM applications, with their corresponding industry-
speciﬁ c data models, allows for a much closer ﬁ  t with a company’s 
data needs. Where there is a good ﬁ  t out of the box, the database 
design process for both operational and analytical CRM applications 
becomes one of implementing exceptions that have been overlooked by 
the generic industry model. Some CRM vendors have also built in the 
extract, transform and load processes to move information from OLTP 
to OLAP databases although it is highly likely that a client will need to 
modify and customize the standard processes.  
    Customer information ﬁ elds 
   Most CRM software has predeﬁ ned ﬁ elds in different modules, whether 
for sales, marketing or service applications. For example, in a sales 
application, a number of ﬁ elds (columns) of information about customers 
are common: contact data, contact history, transactional history, current 
pipeline, future opportunities, products and communication preferences. 
    Contact data 
   Who is the main contact (name) and who else (other names) is involved 
in buying decisions? What are their roles? Who are the decision-makers, 
buyers, inﬂ uencers, initiators and gatekeepers? What are the customer’s 
invoice addresses, delivery addresses, phone numbers, fax numbers, 
e-mail addresses, street addresses and postal addresses?  
    Contact history 
   Who has communicated with the customer, when, about what, in which 
medium and with what outcome?  

===== PAGE 122 =====
 
Developing, managing and using customer-related databases 99
    Transactional history 
   What has the customer bought and when? What has been offered to the 
customer, but not been purchased?  
    Current pipeline 
   What opportunities are currently in the sales pipeline? What is the 
value of each opportunity? What is the probability of closing? Is there a 
10 per cent, 20 per cent  …  90 per cent chance of making a sale? Some 
CRM applications enable sales people to allocate red, amber or green 
signals to opportunities according to the probability of success.  
    Opportunities 
   Whereas  ‘ transactional history ’  looks backwards,  ‘ opportunity ’  looks 
forwards. This is where opportunities that have not yet been opened or 
discussed are recorded.  
Products
What products does the customer have? When were these products 
purchased, and when are they due for renewal? Have there been any 
service issues related to these products in the past?
    Communication preferences 
  What is the preferred medium of communication – mail, telephone, e-
mail, face-to-face, etc.? If it is e-mail, is plain text or html preferred? 
What is the preferred salutation? And the preferred contact time and 
location? Customers may prefer you to contact them by phone for some 
communications (e.g. an urgent product recall), by mail for others (e.g. 
invoicing), by e-mail (e.g. for advice about special offers) and face-to-
face for other reasons (e.g. news about new products). These preferences 
can change over time. When a customer’s preferences are used during 
customer communications, it is evidence that the company is responsive 
to customer expectations. Many companies allow customers to opt in to, 
or out of, different forms of communication. Customers may prefer to 
adjust their own preferences. Amazon.com, for example, allows customers 
to opt to receive e-mail about six different types of content: terms and 
conditions of shopping at Amazon; new products; research surveys; 
magazine subscription renewal notices; information about and from 
Amazon’s partners and special offers. 
    Identify the information sources 
   Information for customer-related databases can be sourced internally 
or externally. Prior to building the database it is necessary to audit 
the company to ﬁ  nd out what data are available. Internal data are 
the foundation of most CRM programmes, though the amount of 
information available about customers depends on the degree of contact 
that the company has with the customer. Some companies sell through 
partners, agents and distributors and have little knowledge about the 
demand chain beyond their immediate contact. 

===== PAGE 123 =====
 
100 Customer Relationship Management
   Internal data can be found in various functional areas. 
●      Marketing might have data on market size, market segmentation, 
customer proﬁ les, customer acquisition channels, marketing campaign 
records, product registrations and requests for product information.  
●      Sales might have records on customer purchasing history including 
recency, frequency and monetary value, buyers ’  names and contact 
details, account number, SIC code, important buying criteria, terms 
of trade such as discounts and payment period, potential customers 
(prospects), responses to proposals, competitor products and pricing, 
and customer requirements and preferences.  
●      Customer service might have records of service histories, service 
requirements, customer satisfaction levels, customer complaints, 
resolved and unresolved issues, enquiries, and loyalty programme 
membership and status.  
●      Finance may have data on credit ratings, accounts receivable and 
payment histories.  
●      Your webmaster may have click-stream data. 
    Enhancing the data 
   External data can be used to enhance the internal data and can be 
imported from a number of sources including market research companies 
and marketing database companies. The business intelligence company 
Claritas, for example, offers clients access to their Behaviourbank and 
Lifestyle Selector databases. These databases are populated with data 
obtained from many millions of returned questionnaires. Experian, 
another intelligence company, provides geodemographic data to its 
clients. External data can be classiﬁ ed into three groups:  
2
    1.     compiled list data 
    2.     census data 
    3.     modelled data. 
    Compiled list data 
   Compiled list data are individual level data assembled by list bureaux or 
list vendors. They build their lists from a variety of personal, household 
and business sources. They might use local or council tax records, 
questionnaire response data, warranty card registrations or businesses’ 
published annual reports. Lists can be purchased outright or rented 
for a period of time and a deﬁ  ned number of uses. Once the list or its 
permitted use has expired, it must be removed from the database. 
   If you were a retailer thinking of diversifying from leisurewear into 
dancewear and had little relevant customer data of your own, you might 
be interested in buying or renting data from an external source. Data 
could have been compiled by the bureau or vendor from a variety of 
sources, such as: 
●      memberships of dance schools 
●      student enrolments on dance courses at school and college  
●      recent purchasers of dance equipment 

===== PAGE 124 =====
 
Developing, managing and using customer-related databases 101
●      lifestyle questionnaire respondents who cite dance as an interest  
●      subscribers to dance magazines 
●      purchasers of tickets for dance and musical theatre.     
    Census data 
   Census data are obtained from government census records. In different 
parts of the world, different information is available. Some censuses 
are unreliable; others do not make much data available for non-
governmental use. 
  In the USA, where the census is conducted every ten years, you cannot 
obtain census data at the household level, but you can at a more aggregated 
geodemographic level, such as zip code, census tract and block group. 
Census tracts are subdivisions of counties. Block groups are subdivisions 
of census tracts, the boundaries of which are generally streets. In the USA 
there are about 225 000 block groups, with an average of over 1000 persons 
per group. Census data available at geodemographic level includes: 
●      median income 
●      average household size 
●      average home value 
●      average monthly mortgage 
●      percentage ethnic breakdown 
●      marital status 
●      percentage college educated. 
   For the UK census there are 155  000 enumeration districts, each 
comprising about 150 households and ten postcodes. The enumeration 
district is the basis for much geodemographic data. 
  Individual-level data are better predictors of behaviour than aggregated 
geodemographic data. However, in the absence of individual-level data, 
census data may be the only option for enhancing your internal data. For 
example, a car reseller could use census data about median income and 
average household size to predict who might be prospects for a purchase 
promotion. 
    Modelled data 
   Modelled data are generated by third parties from data that they 
assemble from a variety of sources. You buy processed, rather than 
raw, data from these sources. Often they have performed clustering 
routines on the data. For example, Claritas has developed a customer 
classiﬁ cation scheme called PRIZM. In Great Britain, PRIZM describes 
the lifestyles of people living in a particular postcode. Every postcode is 
assigned to one of 72 different clusters on the basis of their responses to 
a variety of lifestyle and demographic questions. Eighty per cent of the 
data used in the clustering process is less than three years old. 
    Figure 4.2    provides the PRIZM proﬁ le of residents of one postcode 
in the London suburb of Twickenham. They are assigned to PRIZM 
code A101, which applies to about one-third of one per cent of 
households in the country. The ﬁ gure proﬁ les their occupational status, 
living accommodation, car ownership, vacation choices and media 
consumption.

===== PAGE 125 =====
 
102 Customer Relationship Management
   If you want to use external data to enhance your internal data, you’ll 
need to send a copy of the data that you want to enhance to the external 
data source. The source will match its ﬁ  les to yours using an algorithm 
that recognizes equivalence between the ﬁ  les (often using names and 
addresses). The source then attaches the relevant data to your ﬁ  les and 
returns them to you. 
    Secondary and primary data 
   Customer-related data are either secondary or primary. Secondary data 
are data that have already been collected, perhaps for a purpose that 
is very different from your CRM requirement. Primary data are that 
collected for the ﬁ rst time, either for CRM or other purposes. 
  Primary data collection through traditional means, such as surveys, 
can be very expensive. Companies have, therefore, had to ﬁ nd relatively 
low cost ways to generate primary customer data for CRM applications. 
Among the data-building schemes that have been used are the following: 
●       Competition entries  : customers are invited to enter competitions of 
skill or lotteries. They surrender personal data on the entry forms.  
●       Subscriptions : customers may be invited to subscribe to a newsletter 
or magazine, again surrendering personal details  
●       Registrations : customers are invited to register their purchase. This 
may be so that they can be advised on product updates.  
●       Loyalty programmes : many companies run loyalty programmes. These 
enable companies to link purchasing behaviour to individual customers 
and segments. When joining a programme, customers complete 
application forms providing the company with personal, demographic 
and even lifestyle data. 
    Select the database 
technology and hardware 
platform
   Customer-related data can be stored in a database in a number of 
different ways. 
Young professionals Lifestyle: A (A–D)
Rented accommodation Income quintile: 1 (1–5)
Above average car ownership Cluster type: 1 (1–72)
Take foreign holidays 0.34% of GB households
Read the quality press Income rank: 5 (1–72)
Assigned to PRIZM code A101 Age rank: 28 (1–72)
 Figure 4.2 
      PRIZM analysis of 
TW9 1UU, England    

===== PAGE 126 =====
 
Developing, managing and using customer-related databases 103
    1.     hierarchical  
    2.     network  
    3.     relational.    
   Hierarchical and network databases were the most common form 
between the 1960s and 1980s. The hierarchical database is the oldest 
form and not well suited to most CRM applications. You can imagine 
the hierarchical model as an organization chart or family tree, in which 
a child can have only one parent, but a parent can have many children. 
The only way to get access to the lower levels is to start at the top and 
work downwards. When data is stored in hierarchical format, you may 
end up working through several layers of higher-level data before getting 
to the data you need. Product databases are generally hierarchical. A 
major product category will be subdivided repeatedly until all forms of 
the product have their own record. 
   To extend the family tree metaphor, the network database allows 
children to have one, none or more than one parent. Before the network 
database had the chance to become popular, the relational database 
superseded it, eventually becoming an ANSI standard in 1971.  
3
    Relational databases 
   Relational databases are now the standard architecture for CRM 
applications (see Figure 4.3   ). Relational databases store data in two 
dimensional tables comprised of rows and columns. Relational databases 
have one or more ﬁ elds that provide a unique form of identiﬁ  cation for 
each record. This is called the primary key. For sales databases, each 
customer is generally assigned a unique number which appears in the 
ﬁ rst column. Therefore, each row has a unique number. Companies also 
have other databases for marketing, service, inventory, payments and 
so on. The customer’s unique identifying number enables linkages to be 
made between the various databases. 
   Let’s imagine you are a customer of an online retailer. You buy 
a book and supply the retailer with your name, address, preferred 
delivery choice and credit-card details. A record is created for you on 
the ‘ Customer ’  database, with a unique identifying number. An  ‘ Orders 
received ’  database records your purchase and preferred delivery choice. 
An ‘ Inventory ’  database records that there has been a reduction in 
the stock of the item you ordered. This may trigger a re-ordering 
process when inventory reaches a critical level. A  ‘ Payment ’  database 
records your payment by credit-card. There will be one-to-many 
linkages between your customer record and these other databases. 
With the advent of enterprise suites from vendors such as Oracle 
and SAP , all of these databases may reside in the one system and be 
preintegrated. The choice of hardware platform is inﬂ  uenced by several 
conditions:
    1.     The size of the databases. Even standard desktop PCs are capable 
of storing huge amounts of customer data.   However, they are not 
designed for this data to be shared easily between several users.

===== PAGE 127 =====
 
104 Customer Relationship Management
    2.     Existing technology. Most companies will already have technology 
that lends itself to database applications.  
   3.     The number and location of users. Many CRM applications are quite 
simple, but in an increasingly global marketplace the hardware may 
need very careful speciﬁ cation and periodic review. For example, the 
hardware might need to enable a geographically dispersed, multilingual, 
user group to access data for both analytical and operational purposes. 
    Relational database management system (RDBMS) 
   A relational database management system can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 An RDBMS is a software programme that allows users to create, 
update and administer a relational database. 
   There are a number of relational database management systems available 
from technology ﬁ rms that are well suited to CRM applications. Leading 
RDBMS products are Oracle, DB2 from IBM, and Microsoft’s SQL 
server. Most RDBMS products use SQL to access, update and query the 
database.
 Figure 4.3 
      Relational database 
model  
4      

===== PAGE 128 =====
 
Developing, managing and using customer-related databases 105
  The selection of the CRM database can be done in parallel with the 
next step in this process, selection of CRM applications. Modern database 
applications come together with their own database schema, which 
predetermines the tables and columns in the database structure. Each 
CRM vendor then supports a speciﬁ  ed list of database technologies, for 
example, Oracle or SQL server. 
   Indeed, it is possible to buy an entire platform, consisting of integrated 
hardware, operating system (OS), database and CRM applications. 
Leading platforms include UNIX, Microsoft and IBM. The UNIX 
platform offers a number of hardware/OS/database options, such 
as Hewlett-Packard hardware, Digital UNIX operating system and 
Oracle database. The IBM platform employs AS/400 hardware, OS/400 
operating system and DB2/400 database.    Microsoft NT servers are 
becoming more popular for CRM applications, due to the ease with 
which they can be scaled and expanded.
    Populate the database 
   Having decided what information is needed and the database and 
hardware requirements, the next task is to obtain the data and enter it 
onto the database. CRM applications need data that are appropriately 
accurate. We use the  ‘ appropriately ’  because the level of accuracy 
depends upon the function of the database. As noted earlier, operational 
CRM applications generally need more accurate and contemporary data 
than analytical applications. 
  You may have personally experienced the results of poor quality 
data. Perhaps you have received a mailed invitation to become a donor 
to a charity, to which you already donate direct from your salary. This 
could have happened when a prospecting list that has been bought by 
the charity was not been checked against current donor lists. Perhaps 
you have been addressed as Mrs although you prefer Ms. This is caused 
because the company has either not obtained or not acted or checked 
your communication preferences. 
   One of the biggest issues with customer data is not so much incorrect 
data as missing data. Many organizations ﬁ  nd it difﬁ cult to obtain even 
basic customer data, such as e-mail addresses and preferences. The main 
steps in ensuring that the database is populated with appropriately 
accurate data are as follows: 
    1.     source the data 
    2.     verify the data 
    3.     validate the data 
    4.     de-duplicate the data 
    5.     merge and purge data from two or more sources. 
 Sourcing :  organizations must develop explicit processes to obtain 
information from customers, such as on initial sign-up or when concluding 
a service call. Organizations cannot rely on customer goodwill; data must 
be collected whenever interaction occurs .

===== PAGE 129 =====
 
106 Customer Relationship Management
Veriﬁ cation : this task is conducted to ensure that the data has been 
entered exactly as found in the original source. This can be a very labour-
intensive process since it generally involves keying the data in twice with 
the computer programmed to ﬂ ag mismatches. An alternative is to check 
visually that the data entered match the data at the primary source. 
Validation : this is concerned with checking the accuracy of the data 
that are entered. There are a number of common inaccuracies, many 
associated with name and address ﬁ elds: misspelt names, incorrect titles, 
inappropriate salutations. A number of processes can improve data 
accuracy. 
●      range validation: does an entry lie outside the possible range for a ﬁ eld? 
●      missing values: the computer can check for values that are missing in 
any column.  
●      check against external sources: you could check postcodes against an 
authoritative external listing from the mail authorities. 
De-duplication : also known as de-duping. Customers become aware 
that their details appear more than once on a database when they 
receive identical communications from a company. This might occur 
when external data is not cross-checked against internal data, when two 
or more internal lists are used for the mailing or when customers have 
more than one address on a database. There may be sound cost reasons 
for this (de-duplication does cost money), but from the customer’s 
perspective it can look wasteful and unprofessional. De-duplication 
software is available to help in the process. 
   The de-duplication process needs to be alert to the possibility of two 
types of error: 
   1.     Removing a record that should be retained. For example, if a property 
is divided into unnumbered apartments and you have transactions 
 Figure 4.4        Output 
from merge–purge 
operation  5      

===== PAGE 130 =====
 
Developing, managing and using customer-related databases 107
with more than one resident, then it would be a mistake to assume 
duplication and delete records. Similarly, you may have more than one 
customer in a household, bearing the same family name or initials. 
    2.     Retaining a record that should be removed. For example, you may 
have separate records for a customer under different titles such as 
Mr and Dr.    
Merge and purge  : also known as merge–purge (see  Figure 4.4   ), this is 
a process that is performed when two or more databases are merged. 
This might happen when an external database is merged to an internal 
database, when two internal databases are merged (e.g. marketing and 
customer service databases), or when two external lists are bought 
and merged for a particular purpose such as a campaign. There can be 
signiﬁ cant costs savings for marketing campaigns when duplications are 
purged from the combined lists. 
    Maintain the database 
   Customer databases need to be updated to keep them useful. Consider 
the following statistics: 
●      19% of managing directors change jobs in any year  
●      8% of businesses relocate in any year  
●      in the UK, 5% of postcodes change in an average year  
●      in western economies about 1.2% of the population dies each year  
●      in the USA, over 40 million people change addresses each year. 
   It does not take long for databases to degrade. Companies can maintain 
data integrity in a number of ways. 
    1.     Ensure that data from all new transactions, campaigns and 
communications is inserted into the database immediately. You will 
need to develop rules and ensure that they are applied.  
    2.     Regularly de-duplicate databases. 
    3.     Audit a subset of the ﬁ les every year. Measure the amount of 
degradation. Identify the source of degradation: is it a particular data 
source or ﬁ eld?  
    4.     Purge customers who have been inactive for a certain period of time. 
For frequently bought products, the dormant time period might be six 
months or less. For products with a longer repeat purchase cycle, the 
period will be longer. It is not always clear what a suitable dormancy 
period is. Some credit-card users, for example, may have different 
cards in different currencies. Inactivity for a year only indicates that 
the owner has not travelled to a country in the previous year. The 
owner may make several trips in the coming year.  
    5.     Drip-feed the database. Every time there is a customer contact there is 
an opportunity to add new or verify existing data.  
   6.     Get customers to update their own records. When Amazon customers 
buy online, they need to conﬁ rm or update invoice and delivery details.  

===== PAGE 131 =====
 
108 Customer Relationship Management
    7.     Remove customers ’  records when they request this.  
    8.     Insert decoy records. If the database is managed by an external 
agency, you might want to check the effectiveness of the agency’s 
performance by inserting a few dummy records into the database. If 
the agency fails to spot the dummies, you may have a problem with 
their service standards.    
   Users with administrative rights can update records. Database updating 
and maintenance is also enabled by database query language. Common 
languages are SQL (Structured Query Language) and QBE (Query By 
Example). Maintenance queries available in SQL include UPDATE, 
INSERT and DELETE commands. You can use the commands to update 
your customer-related data. INSERT, for example, adds a new record to 
the database.  
    Desirable data attributes 
   Maintaining the database means that users will be more likely to have 
their need for accurate and relevant data met. Accuracy and relevance 
are two of six desirable data attributes that have been identiﬁ  ed – data 
should be shareable, transportable, accurate, relevant, timely and 
secure.  6   You can remember these desirable data attributes through the 
mnemonic STARTS. 
   Data need to be  shareable  because several users may require access 
to the same data at the same time. For example, proﬁ  le information 
about customers who have bought annual travel insurance might need 
to be made available to customer service agents in several geographic 
locations simultaneously as they deal with customer enquiries in 
response to an advertising campaign. 
   Data need to be  transportable  from storage location to user. Data 
need to be made available wherever and whenever users require. The 
user might be a hot-desking customer service representative, a delivery 
driver en route to a pick-up, an independent mortgage consultant or a 
salesperson in front of a prospect. Today’s international corporations 
with globally distributed customers, product portfolios across several 
categories and multiple routes to market face particularly challenging 
data transportation problems. Electronic customer databases are essential 
for today’s businesses, together with enabling technologies, such as data 
synchronization, wireless communications and web browsers to make 
the data fully transportable. 
  Data  accuracy  is a troublesome issue. In an ideal world it would be 
wonderful to have 100 per cent accurate data. But data accuracy carries 
a high costs. Data are captured, entered, integrated and analysed at 
various moments. Any or all of these processes may be the source 
of inaccuracy. Keystroke mistakes can cause errors at the point of 
data entry. Inappropriate analytical processes can lead to ill-founded 
conclusions. In CRM, data inaccuracy can lead to undue waste in 
marketing campaigns, inappropriate prospecting by salespeople and 

===== PAGE 132 =====
 
Developing, managing and using customer-related databases 109
general suboptimal customer experience. It also erodes trust in the 
CRM system, thus reducing usage. This leads to further degrading of 
data quality. To counter this, usage volumes and data quality should 
be monitored. Data need to be entered at source rather than second 
hand; user buy-in needs to be managed; data quality processes such as 
de-duplication need to be introduced. Newsagency and book retailer WH 
Smith attribute high response rates of CRM-enabled direct marketing to 
the accuracy of their database. For example, an offer of Delia Smith’s  How
to Cook  book achieved an 8 per cent response rate, signiﬁ cantly more than 
was the norm before their data quality project was implemented. 
Relevant  data is pertinent for a given purpose. To check a customer’s 
credit worthiness you need their transaction and payment histories, and 
their current employment and income status. To ﬂ  ag customers who are 
hot prospects for a cross-sell campaign, you need their propensity-to-
buy scores. In designing a data management system to support a CRM 
strategy, relevance is a major issue. You need to know what decisions will 
be made and what information is needed to enable them to be made well. 
Timely  data is data that is available as and when needed. Data that is 
retrieved after a decision is made is not helpful. Equally, decision-makers 
do not want to be burdened with data before the need is felt. Bank tellers 
need to have propensity-to-buy information available to them at the time 
a customer is being served. 
  Data  security  is a hugely important issue for most companies. Data, 
particularly data about customers, is a major resource and a source of 
competitive advantage. It provides the foundation for delivery of better 
solutions to customers. Companies do need to protect their data against 
loss, sabotage and theft. Many companies regularly back-up their data. 
Security is enhanced through physical and electronic barriers such as 
ﬁ rewalls. Managing data security in a partner environment is particularly 
challenging, as it is essential that competing partners do not see each 
other’s sales leads and opportunity information, despite being signed 
into the same CRM system through the same portal. 
    Data integration 
  As noted earlier, in most companies there are several customer-related 
databases, maintained by different functions or channels. There might 
also be customer data in product or production databases, as well as 
call centres and websites, as suggested in  Figure 4.5   . External data from 
suppliers, business partners, franchisees and others may also need to be 
integrated.
   Failure to integrate databases may lead to inefﬁ ciency, duplication and 
damaged customer relationships. Poor integration is indicated when you 
have bought an item online, only to be offered the same item at a later 
time through a different channel of the same company. 
   Customer data integration relies on standardization of data across 
databases. An indicator of the magnitude of the problem is that when 
Dun  &  Bradstreet was integrating data from several sources to create 

===== PAGE 133 =====
 
110 Customer Relationship Management
a marketing database it found 113 different entries for AT & T alone. 
These included ATT, A.T.T., AT and T and so on. 
  Companies often face the challenge of integrating data from several 
sources into a coherent single view of the customer. Sometimes this 
becomes a signiﬁ cant challenge in a CRM project, and a necessary hurdle to 
cross before implementing marketing, sales or service CRM applications. 
   The major on-premise CRM vendors, such as Oracle and SAP , 
offer solutions to this problem. SAP , for example, offers Master Data 
Management as part of its NetWeaver business integration platform. 
This enables companies to capture and consolidate data from different 
sources into a centralized database. 
   For companies with older mainframe (legacy) systems, another 
solution to the problem of database integration is to convert to newer 
systems with a centralized database that can accept real time inputs from 
a number of channels. 
7   However, where there is considerable investment 
in legacy systems and a huge number of records this may not be cost 
effective. Legacy systems are typically batch-processing systems. In 
other words, they do not accept real time data. Many technology ﬁ  rms 
have developed software and systems to allow companies to integrate 
databases held on different legacy systems. Sometimes middleware 
has to be written to integrate data from diverse sources. Middleware is 
a class of software that connects different parts of a system that would 
not otherwise be able to communicate to each other. Middleware acts as 
a broker of information between systems, receiving information from 
source systems, and passing it to destination systems in a format that 
can be understood. It is often referred to as a kind of  ‘ glue ’  that holds a 
network together. 
External data
Integrated
customer
database
Data
analysis
and
mining
CRM strategy
development
and
implementation
Home shopping
Web-site
Catalogue store
Party plan
Retail store
 Figure 4.5 
      A single view of the 
customer    

===== PAGE 134 =====
 
Developing, managing and using customer-related databases 111
    Data warehousing 
  As companies have grown larger they have become separated both 
geographically and culturally from the markets and customers they 
serve. Disney, an American corporation, has operations in Europe, Asia 
and Australasia, as well as in the USA. Benetton, the French fashion 
brand has operations across ﬁ ve continents. In retailing alone it operates 
over 7000 stores and concessions. Companies such as these generate 
a huge volume of data that needs to be converted into information that 
can be used for both operational and analytical purposes. 
   The data warehouse is a solution to that problem. Data warehouses 
are really no more than repositories of large amounts of operational, 
historical and other customer-related data. Data volume can reach 
terabyte levels, i.e. 2 
40  bytes of data. A warehouse is a repository for 
data imported from other databases. Attached to the front end of the 
warehouse is a set of analytical procedures for making sense out of the 
data. Retailers, home shopping companies and banks have been early 
adopters of data warehouses. 
   Watson describes a data warehouse as follows:  8
●       subject-oriented : the warehouse organizes data around the essential 
subjects of the business (customers and products) rather than around 
applications such as inventory management or order processing.  
●       integrated : it is consistent in the way that data from several sources 
is extracted and transformed. For example, coding conventions are 
standardized: M      /H11005      male, F      /H11005      female.  
       Case 4.1   
  Data integration at the American Heart Association      
  The American Heart Association (AHA) is a not-for-proﬁ t US health organization dedicated to 
reducing disability and death from heart attack, stroke and related cardiovascular disorders. 
   One of the AHA’s major goals has been improving its relationships with stakeholders, 
including many thousands of volunteers conducting unpaid work for the organization, 
donors, businesses and the media. However, a challenge facing the AHA in achieving this 
goal was integrating the organization’s data, which was previously located in over 150 
separate databases, often geographically isolated and speciﬁ c to certain departments within 
the organization. These provided a fragmented view of customers ’  proﬁ les and history of 
activities.
  AHA chose to implement a CRM software system across the organization to integrate all 
existing databases. Since implementation the AHA has found its staff is far more productive, 
it is able to respond to customers more quickly and provide more personalized service. 
Donations from customers have increased by over 20 per cent, using the system to contact 
potential donors compared to previous activities. 

===== PAGE 135 =====
 
112 Customer Relationship Management
●       time-variant : data are organized by various time-periods (e.g. months). 
●       non-volatile : the warehouse’s database is not updated in real time. 
There is periodic bulk uploading of transactional and other data. This 
makes the data less subject to momentary change. 
  There are a number of steps and processes in building a warehouse. 
First, you must identify where the relevant data is stored. This can be a 
challenge. When the Commonwealth Bank opted to implement CRM 
in its retail banking business, it found that relevant customer data were 
resident on over 80 separate systems. Secondly, data must be extracted 
from those systems. It is possible that when these systems were developed 
they were not expected to align with other systems. 
   The data then needs to be transformed into a standardized, consistent 
and clean format. Data in different systems may have been stored in 
different forms, as  Figure 4.6    indicates. Also, the cleanliness of data from 
different parts of the business may vary. The culture in sales may be very 
driven by quarterly performance targets. Getting sales representatives to 
maintain their customer ﬁ les may be not straightforward. Much of their 
information may be in their heads. On the other hand, direct marketers 
may be very dedicated to keeping their data in good shape. 
Data standardization
– Personal data: m/f, M/F , male/female
– Units of measurement: metric/imperial
– Field names: sales value, Sale$, $val
– Dates: mm/dd/yy, dd/mm/yyyy, yyyy-mm-dd
Data cleaning
– De-duplication
– Updating and purging
– Identify misuse of data entry fields e.g. use of phone field to record e-mail address
 Figure 4.6 
      Data transformation    
  After transformation, the data then needs to be uploaded into the 
warehouse. Archival data that have little relevance to today’s operations 
may be set aside, or only uploaded if there is sufﬁ  cient space. Recent 
operational and transactional data from the various functions, channels 
and touchpoints will most probably be prioritized for uploading. 
   Refreshing the data in the warehouse is important. This may be done 
on a daily or weekly basis depending upon the speed of change in the 
business and its environment.  
    Data marts 
  A data mart is a scaled down version, or subset, of the data warehouse, 
customized for use in a particular business function or department. 

===== PAGE 136 =====
 
Developing, managing and using customer-related databases 113
Marketing and sales may have their own data marts enabling them to 
conduct separate analyses and make strategic and tactical decisions. 
Some large data warehousing projects have taken years to implement 
and have yielded few measurable beneﬁ  ts. According to a Gartner Inc., 
75 per cent of data warehouse implementations will fail to meet their 
delivery targets. The Meta Group says 20 per cent fail outright and 50 
per cent fall short of expectations. 
9   Data mart project costs are lower 
because the volume of data stored are reduced, the number of users is 
capped, and the business focus is more precise. Technology requirements 
are less demanding.
       Case 4.2   
  Data warehousing at Owens & Minor Inc.      
  Owens  &  Minor Inc., a Fortune 500 company headquartered in Richmond, VA, is the USA’s 
leading distributor of national name brand medical/surgical supplies. The company’s data 
warehouse project was ﬁ rst implemented in April 1997, starting with a single subject area – 
sales. Today, the data warehouse environment has grown to integrate over 20 different subject 
areas with over ten years of history. The size of the warehouse is just under 2 terabytes of 
total space. Internally there are over 900 users out of a total employee base of 3000, which 
is a very high percentage of business intelligence users. Externally Owens  &  Minor has four 
different extranet user groups that total around 600 users. 
   Source: The Data Warehousing Institute  10
    Data access and 
interrogation
  CRM applications allow users to interact with customer-related databases 
for operational purposes. Sales representatives add data to customer 
records after a call is completed; CSRs in call centres log inbound calls 
on customer records; marketers update online brochures as product 
speciﬁ cations change. 
   In addition, CRM users want to interrogate data for analytical 
purposes, or receive management reports. There are three main ways of 
doing this – standard reports, database queries, and data mining.  11
    Standard reports 
  Standard reports are automatically generated periodically by the CRM 
system. Examples include monthly reports to sales management about 
sales representatives ’  activity and performance against quota, and daily 
reports of call centre activity. OLAP technologies allow users to drill 
down into the data on a screen rather than resorting to a ﬂ  at, ﬁ xed-
format, report. Starting with aggregated sales data for a region, a sales 

===== PAGE 137 =====
 
114 Customer Relationship Management
manager can drill down into data about individual sales representatives 
and their customers, to reveal where causes of underperformance lie. 
Special reports can also be produced when ad hoc queries are made of 
a database, data warehouse or data mart. Most database management 
systems incorporate some reporting capability. 
    Database queries 
  A number of different types of query languages are available to CRM users 
when they want to raise a database query. Some are graphical – users can 
click and drag the data they want, and then drill down until they reach 
the level of granularity they require. Database managers may prefer to use 
SQL, which is now the standard query language for relational databases. 
SQL queries employing standard commands, such as SELECT, INSERT, 
DELETE, UPDATE, CREATE, DROP , can be used to access required data. 
    Data mining 
   In the CRM context, data mining can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 Data mining is the application of descriptive and predictive analytics 
to support the marketing, sales and service functions. 12
  Although data mining can be performed on operational databases, it 
is more commonly applied to the more stable datasets held in data marts 
or warehouses. Higher processing speeds, reduced storage costs and 
better software packages have made data mining more attractive and 
economical.
   Data mining can provide answers to questions that are important for 
both strategic and operational CRM purposes. For example: 
     1.     How can our market and customer base be segmented? 
     2.     Which customers are most valuable? 
     3.     Which customers offer most potential for the future?  
     4.     What types of customers are buying our products? Or not buying?  
   5.     Are there any patterns of purchasing behaviour in our customer base? 
     6.     Should we charge the same price to all these segments?  
     7.     What is the proﬁ le of customers who default on payment?  
     8.     What are the costs of customer acquisition? 
     9.     What sorts of customer should be targeted for acquisition? 
    10.     What offers should be made to speciﬁ c customer groups to increase 
their value?  
    11.     Which customers should be targeted for customer retention efforts?  
    12.     Which retention tactics work well? 
  Data mining helps CRM in a number of ways. It can ﬁ  nd  associations
between data. For example, the data may reveal that customers who buy 
low fat desserts are also big buyers of herbal health and beauty aids, or 

===== PAGE 138 =====
 
Developing, managing and using customer-related databases 115
Sequential patterns  often emerge from data mining. Data miners look 
for  ‘ if  …  then ’  rules in customer behaviour. For example, they might ﬁ nd 
a rule such as  ‘ If a customer buys walking shoes in November, then there 
is a 40 per cent probability that they will buy rainwear within the next 
six months ’ , or  ‘ If a customer calls a contact centre to request information 
about interest rates, then there is a 50 per cent probability the customer 
will churn in the next three months ’ . Rules such as these enable CRM users 
to implement timely tactics. In the ﬁ rst instance, there is an opportunity for 
cross-selling. Secondly, there may be an opportunity to save the customer. 
   Data-mining also works by  classifying . Customers can be classiﬁ  ed 
into mutually exclusive groups. For example, you might be able to 
segment your existing customers into groups according to the value 
they produce for your company. You can then proﬁ le each group. When 
you identify a potential new customer you can judge which group the 
prospect most resembles. That will give you an idea of the prospect’s 
potential value. 
  You could also classify customers into quintiles or deciles in terms of 
important transactional information such as the recency, frequency and 
monetary value of the purchases they have made. This is called RFM 
       Case 4.3   
  Data mining at Marks  &  Spencer      
  Data mining has proven to be a successful strategy for the UK retailer Marks  &  Spencer 
(M & S). The company generates large volumes of data from the ten million customers per 
week it serves in over 300 stores. The organization claims data mining lets it build one-to-one 
relationships with every customer, to the point that whenever individual customers come into 
a store the retailer knows exactly what products it should offer in order to build proﬁ tability. 
   Marks  &  Spencer believes two factors are important in data mining. First is the quality 
of the data. This is higher when the identity of customers is known, usually as a result of 
e-commerce tracking or loyalty programme membership. Second is to have clear business 
goals in mind before starting data mining. For example, M & S uses data mining to identify 
 ‘ high margin ’ ,  ‘ average margin ’  or  ‘ low margin ’  customer groups. The company then 
proﬁ les  ‘ high margin ’  customers. This is used to guide customer retention activities with 
appropriate targeted advertising and promotions. This technique can also be used to proﬁ  le 
 ‘ average margin ’  or  ‘ low margin ’  customers who have the potential to be developed into 
 ‘ high margin ’  customers.      
that consumers of wine enjoy live theatre productions. One analyst at 
Wal-Mart, the American retailer, noted a correlation between diaper sales 
and beer sales, which was particularly strong on Fridays. On investigating 
further he found that fathers were buying the diapers and picking up a 
six-pack at the same time. The company responded to this information by 
locating these items closer to each other. Sales of both rose strongly.  
13  

===== PAGE 139 =====
 
116 Customer Relationship Management
analysis. Then you can experiment with different treatments, making 
different offers and communicating in different ways to selected cells of 
the RFM matrix (see  Figure 4.7   ). You can expect to ﬁ  nd that customers 
who have bought most recently, frequently or spend most with you are 
the most responsive in general terms. 
  Another approach in data mining is  clustering . CRM practitioners 
attempt to cluster customers into groups. The general objective of 
clustering is to minimize the differences between members of a cluster 
while also maximizing the differences between clusters. Clustering 
techniques work by using a deﬁ  ned range of variables to perform 
the clustering procedure. You might, for example, use all available 
transaction data to generate customer segments. There are a number of 
techniques, such as cluster analysis, which ﬁ  nd the hidden clusters.  
14
Once statistical clusters have been formed they need to be interpreted. 
Lifestyle market segments are outputs of cluster analysis on large sets of 
data. Cluster labels such as  ‘ Young working class families ’  or  ‘ Wealthy 
suburbanites ’  are often used to capture the essence of the cluster. 
   Finally, data mining can contribute to CRM by  making predictions  . 
CRM practitioners might use historic purchasing behaviour to predict 
future purchasing behaviour and customer lifetime value. 
   These ﬁ ve major approaches to data mining can be used in various 
sequences. For example, you could use clustering to create customer 
segments, then within segments use transactional data to predict future 
purchasing and customer lifetime value. 
  According to Gartner Inc., market leaders SAS and SPSS offer broad 
data mining solutions that meet most market needs. 
15   There are many 
Recency /H11005 1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
1 /H11005 Monetary value
511
411
311
211
111
Frequency /H11005 1234 5
421
321
221
121
431
331
231
131
441
341
241
141
251
151
451
351
521 531 541 551
 Figure 4.7 
      A recency–
frequency–
monetary value 
matrix    

===== PAGE 140 =====
 
Developing, managing and using customer-related databases 117
other vendors. Successful vendors of CRM analytics provide the 
following:
●      packaged applications to support common CRM decisions such as 
cross-sell and customer churn prediction  
●      a user interface suitable for business users  
●      the capability to access data from various sources including data 
warehouses, data marts, call centres, e-commerce or web-tracking 
systems, as well as third party data sources  
●      robust data mining statistical tools such as cluster analysis, decision 
trees and neural networks that can provide reliable insights into 
different types and volumes of data  
●      reporting tools that make the results of analysis available to decision-
makers such as campaign managers and call centre agents. 
    Privacy issues 
  Privacy and data protection are major concerns to legislators around 
the world. Customers are increasingly concerned about the amount of 
information commercial organizations have about them, and the uses to 
which that information is put. In fact, consumers are not aware of just 
how much information is available to companies. When you use the 
Internet, small programmes called cookies are downloaded onto your 
hard disk from the sites you visit. A very small number of websites obtain 
permission from their site visitors prior to the download; most do not. 
   There have been two major responses to the privacy concerns of 
customers. The ﬁ  rst is self-regulation by companies and associations. 
For example, a number of companies publish their privacy policies and 
make a commercial virtue out of their transparency. Professional bodies 
in ﬁ elds such as direct marketing, advertising and market research have 
adopted codes of practice that members must abide by. 
   The second response has been legislation. In 1980, the Organization 
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) developed a set 
of principles that has served the foundation for personal data protection 
legislation around the world. 
16   These principles are voluntary guidelines 
that member nations can use when framing laws to protect individuals 
against abuses by data gatherers. The principles are as follows: 
●       Purpose speciﬁ cation : at the time of data collection, the consumer 
should be provided with a clear statement of the purposes for which 
the data is being collected.  
●       Data collection processes  : data should be collected only by fair and 
lawful means.  
●       Limited application  : data should be used only for valid business 
purposes.
●       Data quality : personal data should be relevant for the purposes used 
and kept accurate, complete and up to date.  
●       Use limitation  : personal data should not be disclosed, sold, made 
available or otherwise used for purposes than as speciﬁ  ed at the time 

===== PAGE 141 =====
 
118 Customer Relationship Management
of collection unless the consumer gives consent or as required by law. 
Consumer consent can be obtained either through an opt-in or opt-out 
process. Opt-in means than consumers agree that their data may be 
used for a particular purpose. Opt-out means that consumers prohibit 
use for that purpose.  
●       Openness : consumers should be able to receive information about 
developments, practices and policies with regard to their personal 
data. They should be able to ﬁ  nd out what data has been collected 
and the uses to which it has been put. Consumers should have access 
to the data controller.  
●       Access : consumers should be able to access their data in readable 
form, to challenge the data and, if the challenge is successful, have the 
data erased, corrected or completed.  
●       Data security : personal data should be protected against risks such as 
loss, unauthorized access, destruction, use, modiﬁ cation or disclosure.  
●       Accountability : a data controller should be accountable for com-
pliance with these measures. 
  Legislation has been enacted at a number of levels. In 1995, the Council 
of the European Union issued Directive 95/46/EC on the  ‘ Protection 
of Individuals with Regard to the Processing of Personal Data and on 
the Free Movement of Such Data ’ . This applies to all forms of data and 
information processing including e-commerce. It required all member 
states to upgrade their legislation to a common standard by 1998. 
Companies are now only allowed to process personal data where the 
individual has given consent or where, for legal or contractual reasons, 
processing is necessary. EU countries are not allowed to export personal 
data to countries where such exacting standards do not apply. Legislation 
guarantees certain rights to citizens of the EU: 
●       notiﬁ cation : individuals are to be advised without delay about what 
information is being collected, and the origins of that data, if not from 
the individual  
●       explanation  of the logic behind the results of automated decisions 
based on customer data (e.g. why a credit application was rejected)  
●       correction/deleting/blocking  of data that do not comply with 
legislation
●       objection : individuals can object to the way in which their data are 
processed (opt-out). Where the objection is justiﬁ ed, the data controller 
must no longer process the information. 
   Data controllers are also required to comply with certain obligations, 
including:
●      Only collect and process data for legitimate and explicit purposes.  
●      Only collect personal data when individual consent has been granted, 
or is required to enter into or fulﬁ l a contract, or is required by law.  
●      Ensure the data is accurate and up to date.  
●      At the point of data collection, to advise the individual of the identity 
of the collector, the reason for data collection, the recipients of the 

===== PAGE 142 =====
 
Developing, managing and using customer-related databases 119
data, and the individual’s rights in respect of data access, correction 
and deletion.  
●      Ensure that the data is kept secure and safe from unauthorized access 
and disclosure. 
   The USA has not adopted these legislative standards, but in order to 
enable US companies to do business with EU organizations, the US 
Commerce Department has devised a set of  ‘ Safe Harbor ’  principles. 
US organizations in the Safe Harbor are assumed to adhere to seven 
principles regarding notice (as in notiﬁ  cation, above), choice, onward 
transfer (disclosure to third parties), security, data integrity, access and 
enforcement (accountability). US companies obtain Safe Harbor refuge 
by voluntarily certifying that they adhere to these principles. This 
enables data transfers to be made to the USA. Two areas of difference 
between the EU Directive and these Safe Harbor principles are in access 
and enforcement. The Safe Harbor wording for access is weaker. The 
Safe Harbor principle states that  ‘ individuals must have  reasonable  access 
to personal information about them that an organization holds, and to 
be able to correct or amend the information  where it is inaccurate ’  . The 
enforcement principle is unclear about sanctions should a company 
breach the standard and it allows no possibility of enforcement by 
government agencies. 
   In the USA, there is a tendency to rely on self-regulation by individual 
or associated companies, rather than legislation at state or federal 
level. For example, the World-Wide Web Consortium (W3C) has 
developed a Platform for Privacy Preferences (P3P) standard for 
improving privacy protection in e-commerce. This comprises three major 
elements:
    1.     A personal proﬁ le: each Internet user creates a ﬁ  le consisting of 
personal data and privacy rules for use of that data. Personal data 
might include demographic, lifestyle, preference and click-stream 
data. Privacy rules are the rules that the user prescribes for use of the 
data, e.g. opt-in or opt-out rules, and disclosure to third parties. The 
proﬁ le is stored in encrypted form on the user’s hard drive, can be 
updated at any time by the users and is administered by the user’s 
web browser.  
    2 .      A  p r o ﬁ le of website privacy practices: each website discloses what 
information has been accessed from the user’s personal proﬁ  le and 
how it has been used.  
    3.     Automated protocols for accessing and using the user’s data: these 
allow either the user or the user’s agent (perhaps the web browser) 
automatically to ensure that the personal proﬁ le and the privacy rules 
are being complied with. If compliance is assured, then users can 
enter websites and transact without problems.    
   This is now being complemented with a more rigorous approach to 
legislation. In Australia, privacy legislation has been enacted at state and 
federal levels.

===== PAGE 143 =====
 
120 Customer Relationship Management
  References  
       1.         Based on O’Connor, J. and Galvin, E. (2001)  Marketing in the digital age , 
(2nd edn). Harlow, England: Financial Times/Prentice Hall. 
       2.          Drozdenko ,    R.G.   and   Drake ,    P .D.             ( 2002 )        Optimal database marketing: 
strategy, development and data mining             .  Thousand Oaks, CA :       Sage              . 
       3.         ANSI is the American National Standards Institute. 
       4.         Courtesy of StayinFront Inc.,  www.stayinfront.com        Used with 
permission.
       5.         Courtesy of Intelligent Search Technology Ltd,  www.intelligentsearch.
com 
       6.         Based on Watson, R.T. (1999)  Data management: databases and 
organisations . New York: John Wiley. 
       7.          Drozdenko ,    R.G.   and   Drake ,    P .D.             ( 2002 )        Optimal database marketing: 
strategy, development and data mining             .  Thousand Oaks, CA :       Sage              . 
       8.          Watson ,    R.T.             ( 1999 )        Data management: databases and organizations             .   N e w  
York :       John Wiley              . 
       9.         D’Addario, J. (2002)  The application revolution .  http://www.tdwi.org/
Publications/display.aspx?id /H11005     6460 & t/H11005     y . Accessed 11 September 
2007. 
      10.         The Data Warehousing Institute. http://www.tdwi.org/display.
aspx?ID/H110057145. Accessed 11 September 2007. 
        Summary      
   In this chapter you’ve read about the development, management and use of customer-
related databases. CRM cannot deliver its promised beneﬁ  ts without appropriate 
customer-related data. Customer-related data are used for strategic, operational, 
analytical and collaborative CRM purposes. Customer-related databases need to be 
constructed with a very clear idea of the applications for which the data are needed. 
These applications range across the full territory of CRM strategy development and 
implementation. Customer-related data can be used to answer strategic questions such 
as ‘Which customers should we serve? ’ and tactical questions such as ‘What is the best 
day to communicate with a given customer? ’  
   We described a six-step approach to developing a high quality customer-related 
database, consisting of deﬁ  ning the database functions, establishing the information 
requirements, identifying the information sources, selecting the database technology 
and hardware platform, populating and maintaining the database. We saw how 
compiled list data, census data and modelled data can be imported to enhance the basic 
data available in company-maintained databases, most of which adopt the standard 
relational architecture. Data integration from disparate databases is often a barrier to 
the delivery of desired CRM outcomes. Attached to the front end of many databases are 
data mining systems that allow users to make sense of the data. We ended by looking 
at data warehouses, data marts and privacy issues.        

===== PAGE 144 =====
 
Developing, managing and using customer-related databases 121
      11.          Zikmund ,    W.G.  ,   McLeod ,    R.     Jr.   and   Gilbert ,    F.W.             ( 2003 )        Customer 
relationship management: integrating marketing strategy and information 
technology            .  Hoboken, NJ :       John Wiley              . 
      12.         Gartner Inc. (2006)  Magic quadrant for data mining , 1Q06.  www.gartner.
com 
      13.          Dempsey ,   M.                ( 1995 )        Customers compartmentalised .Financial Times       ,    1  
M a r c h                  .  
      14.          Saunders ,    J.             ( 1994 )       Cluster analysis .        In:       G.J.     Hooley   and   M.K.     Hussey 
(eds)       .      Quantitative methods in marketing           .  London :       Dryden Press      , 
p p . 1 3   –        2 8         .  
      15.         Gartner Inc. (2006)  Magic quadrant for data mining , 1Q06.  www.gartner.
com 
      16.          Swift ,    R.S.             ( 2001 )        Accelerating customer relationships using CRM and 
relationship technologies             .  Upper Saddle River, NJ :       Prentice Hall              .        

===== PAGE 145 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 146 =====
 
                                  Customer portfolio 
management  
 Chapter 5 

===== PAGE 147 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 148 =====
 
           Chapter objectives      
   By the end of this chapter you will understand: 
    1.   the beneﬁ ts that ﬂ ow from managing customers as a portfolio  
    2.   a number of disciplines that contribute to customer portfolio management: market 
segmentation, sales forecasting, activity-based costing, lifetime value estimation 
and data mining  
    3.   how customer portfolio management differs between business-to-consumer and 
business-to-business contexts  
    4.   how to use a number of business-to-business portfolio analysis tools  
    5.   the range of customer management strategies that can be deployed across a 
customer portfolio.         
    What is a portfolio? 
   The term portfolio is often used in the context of investments to describe 
the collection of assets owned by an individual or institution. Each asset 
is managed differently according to its role in the owner’s investment 
strategy. Portfolio has a parallel meaning in the context of customers. 
A customer portfolio can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 A customer portfolio is the collection of mutually exclusive customer 
groups that comprise a business’s entire customer base. 
  In other words, a company’s customer portfolio is made up of customers 
clustered on the basis of one or more strategically important variables. 
Each customer is assigned to just one cluster in the portfolio. At one 
extreme, all customers can be treated as identical; at the other, each 
customer is treated as unique. Most companies are positioned somewhere 
between these extremes. 
   One of strategic CRMs fundamental principles is that not all customers 
can, or should, be managed in the same way, unless it makes strategic 
sense to do so. Customers not only have different needs, preferences and 
expectations, but also different revenue and cost proﬁ  les, and therefore 
should be managed in different ways. For example, in the B2B context, 
some customers might be offered customized product and face-to-face 
account management; others might be offered standardized product and 
web-based self-service. If the second group were to be offered the same 
product options and service levels as the ﬁ  rst, they might end up being 
value-destroyers rather than value-creators for the company. 
  Customer portfolio management (CPM) aims to optimize business 
performance – whether that means sales growth, enhanced customer 
proﬁ tability, or something else – across the entire customer base. It does 

===== PAGE 149 =====
 
126 Customer Relationship Management
this by offering differentiated value propositions to different segments 
of customers. For example, the UK-based NatWest Bank manages its 
business customers on a portfolio basis. It has split customers into three 
segments based upon their size, lifetime value and creditworthiness. As 
 Figure 5.1    shows, each cluster in the portfolio is treated to a different value 
proposition. When companies deliver tiered service levels such as these, 
they face a number of questions. Should the tiering be based upon current 
or future customer value? How should the sales and service support 
vary across tiers? How can customer expectations be managed to avoid 
the problem of low tier customers resenting not being offered high tier 
service? What criteria should be employed when shifting customers up 
and down the hierarchy? Finally, does the cost of managing this additional 
complexity pay off in customer outcomes such as enhanced retention 
levels, or ﬁ nancial outcomes such as additional revenues and proﬁ t? 
Corporate Banking Services has three tiers of clients ranked by size, lifetime value and 
credit worthiness.   
– The top tier numbers some 60 multinational clients. These have at least one individual
 relationship manager  attached to them.   
– The second tier numbering approximately 150 have individual client managers
 attached to them.   
– The third tier representing the vast bulk of smaller business clients have access to a
‘Small Business Advisor’ at each of the 100 business centres.  Figure 5.1 
      Customer portfolio 
management in 
NatWest Corporate 
Banking Services    
    Who is the customer? 
  The customer in a B2B context is different from a customer in the B2C 
context. The B2C customer is the end consumer: an individual or a 
household. The B2B customer is an organization: a company (producer 
or reseller) or an institution (not-for-proﬁ  t or government body). CPM 
practices in the B2B context are very different from those in the B2C context. 
  The B2B context differs from the B2C context in a number of ways. First, 
there are fewer customers. In Australia, for example, although there is a 
population of twenty million people, there are only one million registered 
businesses. Secondly, business customers are much larger than household 
customers. Thirdly, relationships between business customers and their 
suppliers typically tend to be much closer than between household 
members and their suppliers. You can read more about this in Chapter 2. 
Often business relationships feature reciprocal trading. Company A 
buys from company B, and company B buys from company A. This 
is particularly common among small and medium-sized enterprises. 

===== PAGE 150 =====
 
Customer portfolio management 127
Fourthly, the demand for input goods and services by companies is 
derived from end user demand. Household demand for bread creates 
organizational demand for ﬂ  our. Fifthly, organizational buying is 
conducted in a professional way. Unlike household buyers, procurement 
ofﬁ cers for companies are often professionals with formal training. Buying 
processes can be rigorously formal, particularly for mission-critical goods 
and services, where a decision-making unit composed of interested 
parties may be formed to deﬁ  ne requirements, search for suppliers, 
evaluate proposals and make a sourcing decision. Often, the value of a 
single organizational purchase is huge: buying an airplane, bridge or 
power station is a massive purchase few households will ever match. 
Finally, much B2B trading is direct. In other words, there are no channel 
intermediaries and suppliers sell direct to customers. 
  These differences mean that the CPM process is very different in the 
two contexts. In the B2B context, because suppliers have access to much 
more customer-speciﬁ c information, CPM uses organization-speciﬁ c data, 
such as sales volume and cost-to-serve, to allocate customers to strategic 
clusters. In the B2C context, individual level data is not readily available. 
Therefore, the data used for clustering purposes tends not to be speciﬁ  c 
to individual customers. Instead, data about groups of customers, for 
example geographic market segments, is used to perform the clustering. 
    Basic disciplines for CPM 
   In this section, you’ll read about a number of basic disciplines that 
can be useful during CPM. These include market segmentation, sales 
forecasting, activity-based costing, customer lifetime value estimation 
and data mining.  
    Market segmentation 
   CPM can make use of a discipline that is routinely employed by 
marketing management: market segmentation. Market segmentation can 
be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 Market segmentation is the process of dividing up a market into 
more-or-less homogenous subsets for which it is possible to create 
different value propositions. 
  At the end of the process the company can decide which segment(s) it 
wants to serve. If it chooses, each segment can be served with a different 
value proposition and managed in a different way. Market segmentation 
processes can be used during CPM for two main purposes. They can be 
used to segment potential markets to identify which customers to acquire, 
and to cluster current customers with a view to offering differentiated value 
propositions supported by different relationship management strategies. 

===== PAGE 151 =====
 
128 Customer Relationship Management
   In this discussion we’ll focus on the application of market 
segmentation processes to identify which customers to acquire. What 
distinguishes market segmentation for this CRM purpose is its very 
clear focus on customer value. The outcome of the process should be 
the identiﬁ cation of the value potential of each identiﬁ  ed segment. 
Companies will want to identify and target customers that can generate 
proﬁ t in the future: these will be those customers that the company and 
its network are better placed to serve and satisfy than their competitors. 
   Market segmentation in many companies is highly intuitive. The 
marketing team will develop proﬁ  les of customer groups based upon 
their insight and experience. This is then used to guide the development 
of marketing strategies across the segments. In a CRM context, market 
segmentation is highly data dependent. The data might be generated 
internally or sourced externally. Internal data from marketing, sales and 
ﬁ nance records are often enhanced with additional data from external 
sources such as marketing research companies, partner organizations in 
the company’s network and data specialists (see  Figure 5.2   ). 
Intuitive
– brain-storm segmentation variables
age, gender, lifestyle
SIC, size, location
– produce word-profiles
– compute sizes of segments
– assess company/segment fit
– make targeting decision
one/several/all segments?
Data-based
– obtain customer data
Internal and external
– analyse customer data
– identify high/medium/low-value customer
segments
– profile customers within segments
age, gender, lifestyle
SIC, size, location
– assess company/segment fit
– make targeting decision
one/several/all segments?
 Figure 5.2 
      Intuitive and data-
based segmentation 
processes    
   The market segmentation process can be broken down into a number 
of steps: 
    1.     identify the business you are in 
    2.     identify relevant segmentation variables  
    3.     analyse the market using these variables 
    4.     assess the value of the market segments 
    5.     select target market(s) to serve. 
    Identify the business you are in 
   This is an important strategic question to which many, but not all, 
companies have an answer. Ted Levitt’s classic article,  ‘ Marketing 
Myopia ’  warned companies of the dangers of thinking only in terms of 

===== PAGE 152 =====
 
Customer portfolio management 129
product-oriented answers. 1   He wrote of a nineteenth century company 
that deﬁ ned itself as being in the buggy-whip industry. It has not 
survived. It is important to consider the answer from the customer 
point of view. For example, is Blockbuster in the video-rental business 
or some other business, perhaps home entertainment or retailing? Is a 
manufacturer of kitchen cabinets in the timber processing industry, or 
the home-improvement business? 
  A customer-oriented answer to the question will enable companies to 
move through the market segmentation process because it helps identify 
the boundaries of the market served, it deﬁ  nes the beneﬁ  ts customers 
seek, and it picks out the company’s competitors. 
   Let’s assume that the kitchen furniture company has deﬁ  ned its 
business from the customer’s perspective. It believes it is in the home 
value improvement business. It knows from research that customers buy 
its products for one major reason: they are home owners who want to 
enhance the value of their properties. The company is now in a position 
to identify its markets and competitors at three levels: 
    1 .       beneﬁ t competitors  : other companies delivering the same beneﬁ  t to 
customers. These might include window replacement companies, 
heating and air-conditioning companies and bathroom renovation 
companies
    2 .       product competitors  : other companies marketing kitchens to 
customers seeking the same beneﬁ t  
    3 .       geographic competitors  : these are beneﬁ  t and product competitors 
operating in the same geographic territory. 
    Identify relevant segmentation variables and 
analyse the market 
  There are many variables that are used to segment consumer and 
organizational markets. Companies can enjoy competitive advantage 
through innovations in market segmentation. For example, before 
Häagen-Dazs, it was known that ice-cream was a seasonally sold product 
aimed primarily at children. Häagen-Dazs upset this logic by targeting an 
adult consumer group with a different, luxurious product, and all-year-
round purchasing potential. We’ll look at consumer markets ﬁ rst. 
    Consumer markets 
   Consumers can be clustered according to a number of shared 
characteristics. These can be grouped into user attributes and usage 
attributes, as summarized in  Figure 5.3   .  
  In recent years there has been a trend away from simply using 
demographic attributes to segment consumer markets. The concern has 
been that there is too much variance within each of the demographic 
clusters to regard all members of the segment as more-or-less homogenous. 
For example, some 30–40 year olds have families and mortgaged homes; 
others live in rented apartments and go clubbing at weekends. Some 
members of religious groups are traditionalists; others are progressives. 

===== PAGE 153 =====
 
130 Customer Relationship Management
  The family lifecycle (FLC) idea has been particularly threatened. The 
FLC traces the development of a person’s life along a path from young 
and single, to married with no children, married with young children, 
married couples with older children, older married couples with no 
children at home, empty nesters still in employment, retired empty nester 
couples, to sole survivor working or not working. Life for many, if not 
most people, does not follow this path. It fails to take account of the many 
and varied life choices that people make: some people never marry, others 
marry late, there are also childless couples, gay and lesbian partnerships, 
extended families, single-parent households and divorced couples. 
   Let’s look at some of the variables that can be used to deﬁ  ne market 
segments. Occupational status is widely used to classify people into 
social grades. Systems vary around the world. In the UK, the JICNARS 
social grading system is employed. This allocates households to one of 
six categories (A, B, C1, C2, D and E) depending on the job of the head 
of household. Higher managerial occupations are ranked A; casual, 
unskilled workers are ranked E. Media owners often use the JICNARS 
scale to proﬁ le their audiences. 
  A number of data analysis companies have developed geodemographic 
classiﬁ cation schemes. CACI, for example, has developed ACORN 
which allocates individuals, households and postcodes to one of the ﬁ ve 
categories shown in  Figure 5.4   , and beyond into 17 groups and 56 types. 
ACORN data suggest that clusters of like households exhibit similar 
buying behaviours. This clustering outcome is based on data covering 
over 400 variables, from online behaviour to housing type, education 
and family structure. 
   Lifestyle research became popular in the 1980s. Rather than using a 
single descriptive category to classify customers as had been the case 
with demographics, it uses multivariate analysis to cluster customers. 
Lifestyle analysts collect data about people’s activities, interests and 
opinions. A lifestyle survey instrument may require answers to 400 
or 500 questions, taking several hours to complete. Using analytical 
processes such as factor analysis and cluster analysis, the researchers are 
able to produce lifestyle or psychographic proﬁ les. The assertion is made 
User attributes Demographic attributes: age, gender, occupational status, household size,
marital status, terminal educational age, household income, stage of family
lifecycle, religion, ethnic origin, nationality 
Geographica attributes: country, region, TV region, city, city size,
postcode, residential neighbourhood
Psychographic attributes: lifestyle, personality
Usage attributes              Benefits sought, volume consumed, share of category spend Figure 5.3 
      Criteria for 
segmenting
consumer markets    

===== PAGE 154 =====
 
Customer portfolio management 131
that we buy products because of their ﬁ  t with our chosen lifestyles. 
Lifestyle studies have been done in many countries, as well as across 
national boundaries. A number of companies conduct lifestyle research 
on a commercial basis and sell the results to their clients. 
   Usage attributes can be particularly useful for CRM purposes. Beneﬁ t 
segmentation has become a standard tool for marketing managers. It is 
axiomatic that customers buy products for the beneﬁ  ts they deliver, not 
for the products themselves. Nobody has ever bought a 5       mm drill bit 
because they want a 5       mm drill bit. They buy because of what the drill 
bit can deliver: a 5       mm hole. CRM practitioners need to understand 
the beneﬁ ts that are sought by the markets they serve. The market for 
toothpaste, for example, can be segmented along beneﬁ t lines. There are 
three major beneﬁ t segments: white teeth, fresh breath, and healthy teeth 
and gums. When it comes to creating value propositions for the chosen 
customers, beneﬁ t segmentation becomes very important. 
  The other two usage attributes, volume consumed and share of 
category spend, are also useful from a CRM perspective. Many companies 
classify their customers according to the volume of business they 
produce. For example, in the B2C context, McDonald’s USA found that 
77 per cent of their sales are to males aged 18 to 34 who eat at McDonald’s 
three to ﬁ ve times per week, despite the company’s mission to be the 
world’s favourite family restaurant. Assuming that they contribute in 
equal proportion to the bottom line, these are customers that the company 
must not lose. The volume they provide allows the company to operate 
very cost-effectively, keeping unit costs low. 
   Companies that rank customers into tiers according to volume, and 
are then able to identify which customers fall into each tier, may be able 
to develop customer migration plans to move lower volume customers 
higher up the ladder from ﬁ  rst-time customer to repeat customer, 
majority customer, loyal customer, and onwards to advocate status. 
This only makes sense when the lower volume customers present an 
opportunity. The key question is whether they buy product from other 
suppliers in the category. For example, customer Jones buys ﬁ  ve pairs 
of shoes a year. She only buys one of those pairs from  ‘ Shoes4less ’  retail 
outlets. She therefore presents a greater opportunity than customer 
1.   Wealthy  achievers  25.4%
2.   Urban prosperity  11.5%
3.   Comfortably off 27.4%
4.   Moderate means 13.8%
5.   Hard pressed 21.2%
6. Unclassified  0.7%
The number represents the % of UK households falling into each category
 Figure 5.4 
      Geodemographics, 
ACORN    

===== PAGE 155 =====
 
132 Customer Relationship Management
Smith who buys two pairs a year, but both of them from Shoes4less. 
Shoes4less has the opportunity to win four more sales from Jones, but 
none from Smith. This does not necessarily mean that Jones is more 
valuable than Smith. That depends on the answers to other questions. 
First, how much will it cost to switch Jones from her current shoe 
retailer(s), and what will it cost to retain Smith’s business? Secondly, 
what are the margins earned from these customers? If Jones is very 
committed to her other supplier, it may not be worth trying to switch 
her. If Smith buys high margin fashion and leisure footwear and Jones 
buys low margin footwear, then Smith might be the better opportunity 
despite the lower volume of sales. 
   Most segmentation programmes employ more than one variable. 
For example, a chain of bars may deﬁ  ne its customers on the basis of 
geography, age and music preference.  Figure 5.5    shows how the market 
for chocolate can be segmented by usage occasion and satisfaction. Four 
major segments emerge from this bivariate segmentation of the market.  
Hunger
Planned
10%
Emotional
need 20%
Later
sharing
30%
Functional
40%
Satisfaction
Gifts
Family
sharing
Take
home
Eat now
Usage
Light snacking Indulgence
 Figure 5.5 
      Bivariate 
segmentation of the 
chocolate market    
(Source: Mintel 
1998)
    Business markets 
   Business markets can also be segmented in a number of ways, as shown 
in  Figure 5.6 
   The basic starting point for most B2B segmentation is the International 
Standard Industrial Classiﬁ  cation (ISIC), which is a property of the 
United Nations Statistics Division. While this is a standard that is in 
widespread use, some countries have developed their own schemes. 
In the USA, Canada and Mexico, there is the North American Industry 
Classiﬁ cation System (NAICS). A 1400 page NAICS manual was 

===== PAGE 156 =====
 
Customer portfolio management 133
published in 2007. In New Zealand and Australia there is the Australia 
and New Zealand Standard Industrial Classiﬁ cation (ANZSIC). 
   The ISIC classiﬁ es all forms of economic activity. Each business entity 
is classiﬁ ed according to its principal product or business activity, and 
is assigned a four-digit code. These are then amalgamated into 99 major 
categories.  Figure 5.7    illustrates several four-digit codes. 
Business market segmentation
criteria
Illustration
International Standard Industrial   An internationally agreed standard for classifying goods
 and service producers
Geographically concentrated or dispersed Dispersion
Large, medium, small businesses: classified by number of 
employees, number of customers, profit or turnover 
Size
Global account, National account, Regional
account, A or B or C class accounts  
Account status
/H11021$50 000, /H11021$100 000, /H11021$200 000, /H11021$500 000 Account value
Open tender, sealed bid, internet auction, centralized,  
decentralized 
Buying processes
Continuity of supply (reliability), product quality, 
price, customization, just-in-time, service support
before or after sale
Buying criteria
Propensity to switch Satisfied with current suppliers, dissatisfied
Share of customer spend in the
category
Sole supplier, majority supplier, minority supplier,
non-supplier
City, region, country, trading bloc (ASEAN, EU) Geography
Risk averse, innovator Buying style
Classification
 Figure 5.6 
      How business 
markets are 
segmented    
ISIC 4-digit code
1200
2511
5520
8030
Activity
Mining of uranium and thorium ores 
Manufacture of rubber tyres and tubes; re-treading and
rebuilding of rubber tyres
Restaurants, bars and canteens 
Higher education 
 Figure 5.7 
      Examples of ISIC 
codes    

===== PAGE 157 =====
 
134 Customer Relationship Management
    Account value 
   Most businesses have a scheme for classifying their customers according 
to their value. The majority of these schemes associate value with some 
measure of sales revenue or volume. This is not an adequate measure 
of value, because it takes no account of the costs to win and keep the 
customer. We address this issue later in the chapter.  
    Share of wallet (SOW) 
   Share of category spend gives an indication of the future potential that 
exists within the account. A supplier with only a 15 per cent share of a 
customer company’s spending on some raw material has, on the face of 
it, considerable potential.  
    Propensity-to-switch 
   Propensity-to-switch may be high or low. It is possible to measure 
propensity-to-switch by assessing satisfaction with the current supplier, 
and by computing switching costs. Dissatisfaction alone does not 
indicate a high propensity to switch. Switching costs may be so high that, 
       Case 5.1   
  Customer segmentation at Dell Computer      
   Dell was founded in 1984 with the revolutionary idea of selling custom-built computers 
directly to the customer. Dell has grown to become one of the world’s larger PC 
manufacturers and continues to sell directly to individual consumers and organizations. 
  The direct business model of Dell and the focus on serving business customers has resulted 
in the organization investing heavily in developing an advanced CRM system to manage its 
clearly segmented customers. Dell has identiﬁ ed eight customer segments, these being: Global 
Accounts, Large Companies, Midsize Companies, Federal Government, State and Local 
Government, Education, Small Companies and Consumers. Dell has organized its business 
around these eight segments, where each is managed by a complete business unit with its own 
sales, ﬁ nance, IT, technical support and manufacturing arms. 
   Governments and trade associations often collect and publish 
information that indicates the size of each ISIC code. This can be a useful 
to guide when answering the question, ‘ Which customers should we 
acquire? ’  However, targeting in the B2B context is often conducted not at 
the aggregated level of the ISIC, but at an individual account level. The 
question is not so much,  ‘ Do we want to serve this segment? ’  as much as 
 ‘ Do we want to serve this customer? ’
   Several of these account-level segmentation variables are speciﬁ  cally 
important for CRM purposes: account value, share of category (share of 
wallet) spend and propensity-to-switch.

===== PAGE 158 =====
 
Customer portfolio management 135
even in the face of high levels of dissatisfaction, the customer does not 
switch. For example, customers may be unhappy with the performance 
of their telecommunications supplier, but may not switch because of the 
disruption that such a change would bring about. 
    Assess the value in a market segment and 
select which markets to serve 
  A number of target market alternatives should emerge from the market 
segmentation process. The potential of these to generate value for the 
company will need to be assessed. The potential value of the segmentation 
opportunities depends upon answers to two questions: 
    1.     How attractive is the opportunity? 
    2.     How well placed is the company and its network to exploit the 
opportunity?
    Figure 5.8    identiﬁ es a number of the attributes that can be taken into 
account during this appraisal. The attractiveness of a market segment is 
related to a number of issues, including its size and growth potential, the 
number of competitors and the intensity of competition between them, 
the barriers to entry, and the propensity of customers to switch from 
their existing suppliers. The question of company ﬁ  t revolves around 
the issue of the relative competitive competency of the company and its 
network members to satisfy the requirements of the segment. 
Segment attractiveness
–  size of segment, segment growth rate, price sensitivity of customers, bargaining power of customers,
 customers’ current relationships with suppliers, barriers to segment entry, barriers to segment exit,
 number and power of competitors, prospect of new entrants, potential for differentiation, propensity
 for customer switching 
Company and network fit
–  Does the opportunity fit the company’s objectives, mission, vision and values? Does the company
 and its network possess the operational, marketing, technological, people and other competencies,
 and liquidity to exploit the opportunity?
 Figure 5.8 
      Evaluating 
segmentation
alternatives    
   In principle, if the segment is attractive and the company and 
network competencies indicate a good ﬁ  t, the opportunity may be 
worth pursuing. However, because many companies ﬁ nd that they have 
several opportunities, some kind of scoring process must be developed 
and applied to identify the more valuable opportunities. The matrix in 
 Figure 5.9    can be used for this purpose. 
2   To begin with, companies need 
to identify attributes that indicate the attractiveness of a market segment 

===== PAGE 159 =====
 
136 Customer Relationship Management
(some are listed in  Figure 5.8 ), and the competencies of the company 
and its network. An importance weight is agreed for each attribute. 
The segment opportunity is rated against each attribute and a score is 
computed. The opportunities can then be mapped into  Figure 5.9 .
Fit to company and network competencies
Attractiveness of market segment
Strong
woL
Weak
hgiH
Average
muideM
Attractive markets Medium-priority markets Unattractive markets Figure 5.9 
      McKinsey/General 
Electric customer 
portfolio matrix    
    Sales forecasting 
  The second discipline that can be used for CPM is sales forecasting. 
One major issue commonly facing companies that conduct CPM is that 
the data available for clustering customers takes a historical or, at best, 
present day view. The data identiﬁ  es those customers who have been, 
or presently are, important for sales, proﬁ  t or other strategic reasons. If 
management believes the future will be the same as the past, this presents 
no problem. However, if the business environment is changeable, this 
does present a problem. Because CPMs goal is to identify those customers 
that will be strategically important in the future, sales forecasting can be 
a useful discipline. 
   Sales forecasting, some pessimists argue, is a waste of time, because 
the business environment is rapidly changing and unpredictable. Major 
world events such as terrorist attacks, war, drought and market-based 
changes, such as new products from competitors or high visibility 
promotional campaigns, can make any sales forecasts invalid. 

===== PAGE 160 =====
 
Customer portfolio management 137
   There are a number of sales forecasting techniques that can be applied, 
providing useful information for CPM. These techniques, which fall into 
three major groups, are appropriate for different circumstances. 
●      qualitative methods:
     – customer surveys 
     – sales team estimates 
●      time-series methods:
     – moving average 
     – exponential smoothing 
     – time-series decomposition 
●      causal methods:
     – leading indicators 
     – regression models. 
  Qualitative methods are probably the most widely used forecasting 
methods. Customer surveys ask consumers or purchasing ofﬁ cers to give 
an opinion on what they are likely to buy in the forecasting period. This 
makes sense when customers forward-plan their purchasing. Data can be 
obtained by inserting a question into a customer satisfaction survey. For 
example,  ‘ In the next six months are you likely to buy more, the same or 
less from us than in the current period? ’  And,  ‘ If more, or less, what volume 
do you expect to buy from us? ’  Sometimes, third party organizations such 
as industry associations or trans-industry groups such as the Chamber 
of Commerce or the Institute of Directors collect data that indicate future 
buying intentions or proxies for intention, such as business conﬁ dence. 
   Sales team estimates can be useful when salespeople have built close 
relationships with their customers. A key account management team 
might be well placed to generate several individual forecasts from the 
team membership. These can be averaged or weighted in some way that 
reﬂ ects the estimator’s closeness to the customer. Account managers for 
Dyno Nobel, a supplier of commercial explosives for the mining and 
quarrying industries, are so close to their customers that they are able to 
forecast sales two to three years ahead. 
   Operational CRM systems support the qualitative sales forecasting 
methods, in particular sales team estimates. The CRM system takes 
into account the value of the sale, the probability of closing the sale 
and the anticipated period to closure. Many CRM systems also allow 
management to adjust the estimates of their sales team members, to 
allow for overly optimistic or pessimistic salespeople. 
  Time-series approaches take historical data and extrapolate them 
forward in a linear or curvilinear trend. This approach makes sense when 
there are historical sales data, and the assumption can be safely made that 
the future will reﬂ ect the past. The moving average method is the simplest 
of these. This takes sales in a number of previous periods and averages 
them. The averaging process reduces or eliminates random variation. The 
moving average is computed on successive periods of data, moving on 
one period at a time, as in  Figure 5.10   . Moving averages based on different 
periods can be calculated on historic data to generate an accurate method. 
  A variation is to weight the more recent periods more heavily. The 
rationale is that more recent periods are better predictors. In producing 

===== PAGE 161 =====
 
138 Customer Relationship Management
an estimate for year 2009 in Figure 5.10 , one could weight the previous 
four years’ sales performance by 0.4, 0.3, 0.2, and 0.1, respectively, to 
reach an estimate. This would generate a forecast of 5461. This approach 
is called exponential smoothing. 
   The decomposition method is applied when there is evidence of 
cyclical or seasonal patterns in the historical data. The method attempts 
to separate out four components of the time series: trend factor, cyclical 
factor, seasonal factor and random factor. The trend factor is the long-
term direction of the trend after the other three elements are removed. 
The cyclical factor represents regular long-term recurrent inﬂ  uences on 
sales; seasonal inﬂ uences generally occur within annual cycles. 
   It is sometimes possible to predict sales using leading indicators. A 
leading indicator is some contemporary activity or event that indicates 
that another activity or event will happen in the future. At a macro 
level, for example, housing starts are good predictors of future sales of 
kitchen furniture. At a micro level, when a credit card customer calls into 
a contact centre to ask about the current rate of interest, this is a strong 
indicator that the customer will switch to another supplier in the future. 
   Regression models work by employing data on a number of predictor 
variables to estimate future demand. The variable being predicted is 
called the dependent variable; the variables being used as predictors 
are called independent variables. For example, if you wanted to 
predict demand for cars (the dependent variable) you might use data 
on population size, average disposable income, average car price for 
the category being predicted and average fuel price (the independent 
variables). The regression equation can be tested and validated on 
historical data before being adopted. New predictor variables can be 
substituted or added to see if they improve the accuracy of the forecast. 
This can be a useful approach for predicting demand from a segment.  
    Activity-based costing 
   The third discipline that is useful for CPM is activity-based costing. 
Many companies, particularly those in a B2B context, can trace revenues 
Year
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2-year
moving average 
4880
4900
5040
5270
5495
5550
4-year
moving average 
4960
5085
5267
5410
Sales volumes 
4830
4930
4870
5210
5330
5660
5440 Figure 5.10 
      Sales forecasting 
using moving 
averages    

===== PAGE 162 =====
 
Customer portfolio management 139
to customers. In a B2C environment, it is usually only possible to trace 
revenues to identiﬁ  able customers if the company operates a billing 
system requiring customer details, or a membership scheme such as 
a customer club, store-card or a loyalty programme. 
   In a B2B context, revenues can be tracked in the sales and accounts 
databases. Costs are an entirely different matter. Because the goal of CPM 
is to cluster customers according to their strategic value, it is desirable to 
be able to identify which customers are, or will be, proﬁ  table. Clearly, 
if a company is to understand customer proﬁ  tability, it has to be able 
to trace costs, as well as revenues, to customers. 
   Costs do vary from customer to customer. Some customers are very 
costly to acquire and serve, others are not. There can be considerable 
variance across the customer base within several categories of cost: 
●       customer acquisition costs  : some customers require considerable 
sales effort to move them from prospect to ﬁ  rst-time customer status: 
more sales calls, visits to reference customer sites, free samples, 
engineering advice, guarantees that switching costs will be met by the 
vendor
●       terms of trade  : price discounts, advertising and promotion support, 
slotting allowances (cash paid to retailers for shelf space), extended 
invoice due dates  
●       customer service costs  : handling queries, claims and complaints, 
demands on salespeople and contact centre, small order sizes, high 
order frequency, just-in-time delivery, part load shipments, breaking 
bulk for delivery to multiple sites  
●       working capital costs  : carrying inventory for the customer, cost of 
credit. 
  Traditional product-based or general ledger costing systems do not 
provide this type of detail, and do not enable companies to estimate 
customer proﬁ tability. Product costing systems track material, labour and 
energy costs to products, often comparing actual to standard costs. They 
do not, however, cover the customer-facing activities of marketing, sales 
and service. General ledger costing systems do track costs across all parts 
of the business, but are normally too highly aggregated to establish which 
customers or segments are responsible for generating those costs. 
  Activity-based costing (ABC) is an approach to costing that splits costs 
into two groups: volume-based costs and order-related costs. Volume-
based (product-related) costs are variable against the size of the order, 
but ﬁ xed per unit for any order and any customer. Material and direct 
labour costs are examples. Order-related (customer-related) costs vary 
according to the product and process requirements of each particular 
customer. 
  Imagine two retail customers, each purchasing the same volumes of 
product from a manufacturer. Customer 1 makes no product or process 
demands. The sales revenue is $5000; the gross margin for the vendor 
is $1000. Customer 2 is a different story: customized product, special 
overprinted outer packaging, just-in-time delivery to three sites, provision 
of point-of-sale material, sale or return conditions and discounted 

===== PAGE 163 =====
 
140 Customer Relationship Management
price. Not only that, but Customer 2 spends a lot of time agreeing these 
terms and conditions with a salesperson who has had to call three times 
before closing the sale. The sales revenue is $5000, but after accounting 
for product and process costs to meet the demands of this particular 
customer, the margin retained by the vendor is $250. Other things being 
equal, Customer 1 is four times as valuable as Customer 2. 
   Whereas conventional cost accounting practices report what was 
spent, ABC reports what the money was spent doing. Whereas the 
conventional general ledger approach to costing identiﬁ es resource costs 
such as payroll, equipment and materials, the ABC approach shows 
what was being done when these costs were incurred.  Figure 5.11    shows 
how an ABC view of costs in an insurance company’s claims processing 
department gives an entirely different picture to the traditional view.  
3
General ledger: claims processing department
Salaries
Equipment
Travel expenses
Supplies
Use & Occupancy
Total
ABC view: claims processing dept.
$
Key/scan claims
Analyse claims
Suspend claims
Receive provider enquiries
Resolve member problems
Process batches
Determine eligibility
Make copies
Write correspondence
Attend training
Total
31 500
32 500
83 400
45 000
101 500
119 000
158 000
914 500
145 500
77 100
121 000
Actual
$
620 400
161 200
914 500
58 000
43 900
30 000
Plan
$
880 000
60 000
40 000
30 000
150 000
600 000
Variance
-----
$
2000
(21 400)
(11 200)
(3900)
(34 500)
 Figure 5.11 
      ABC in a claims 
processing
department    
  ABC gives the manager of the claims-processing department a much 
clearer idea of which activities create cost. The next question from 
a CPM perspective is ‘ which customers create the activity? ’  Put another 
way, which customers are the cost drivers? If you were to examine the 
activity cost item ‘ Analyse claims: $121 000 ’ , and ﬁ nd that 80 per cent of 
the claims were made by drivers under the age of 20, you’d have a clear 
understanding of the customer group that was creating that activity cost 
for the business. 
   CRM needs ABC because of its overriding goal of generating proﬁ table 
relationships with customers. Unless there is a costing system in place 
to trace costs to customers, CRM will ﬁ  nd it very difﬁ  cult to deliver 
on a promise of improved customer proﬁ  tability. Overall, ABC serves 
customer portfolio management in a number of ways: 
   1.     when combined with revenue ﬁ gures, it tells you the absolute and 
relative levels of proﬁ t generated by each customer, segment or cohort 

===== PAGE 164 =====
 
Customer portfolio management 141
    2.     it guides you towards actions that can be taken to return customers to 
proﬁ t  
    3.     it helps prioritize and direct customer acquisition, retention and 
development strategies  
    4.     it helps establish whether customization and other forms of value 
creation for customers pay off.    
  ABC sometimes justiﬁ  es management’s conﬁ  dence in the Pareto 
principle, otherwise known as the 80:20 rule. This rule suggests that 80 
per cent of proﬁ  ts come from 20 per cent of customers. ABC tells you 
which customers fall into the important 20 per cent. Research generally 
supports the 80:20 rule. For example, one report from Coopers and 
Lybrand found that, in the retail industry, the top 4 per cent of customers 
account for 29 per cent of proﬁ  ts, the next 26 per cent of customers 
account for 55 per cent of proﬁ  ts and the remaining 70 per cent account 
for only 16 per cent of proﬁ ts.  
    Lifetime value estimation 
   The fourth discipline that can be used for CPM is customer lifetime 
value (LTV) estimation, which was ﬁ rst introduced in Chapter 2. LTV is 
measured by computing the present day value of all net margins (gross 
margins less cost-to-serve) earned from a relationship with a customer, 
segment or cohort. LTV estimates provide important insights that guide 
companies in their customer management strategies. Clearly, companies 
want to protect and ring-fence their relationships with customers, 
segments or cohorts that will generate signiﬁ cant amounts of proﬁ t. 
   Sunil Gupta and Donald Lehmann suggest that customer lifetime 
value can be computed as follows: 
LTV m r
ir/H11005/H11001/H110021
⎛
⎝
⎜⎜⎜
⎞
⎠
⎟⎟
⎟
   where 
LTV      /H11005      lifetime value 
m      /H11005      margin or proﬁ t from a customer per period (e.g. per year) 
r      /H11005      retention rate (e.g. 0.8 or 80%) 
i      /H11005      discount rate (e.g. 0.12 or 12%).  4
   This means that LTV is equal to the margin (m) multiplied by the factor 
r /(1      /H11001       i       /H11002       r ). This factor is referred to as the margin multiple, and is 
determined by both the customer retention rate ( r ) and the discount 
rate ( i ). For most companies the retention rate is in the region of 60 to 
90 per cent. The weighted average cost of capital (WACC), which was 
discussed in Chapter 2, is generally used to determine the discount rate. 
The discount rate is applied to bring future margins back to today’s 
value.  Table 5.1    presents some sample margin multiples based on the 
two variables: customer retention rate and discount rate. For example, 
at a 12 per cent discount rate and 80 per cent retention rate the margin 

===== PAGE 165 =====
 
142 Customer Relationship Management
multiple is 2.5. From this table, you can see that margin multiples for 
most companies, given a WACC of 10 to 16 per cent, and retention 
rates between 60 and 90 per cent, are between 1.07 /H11003      and 4.5     /H11003     . When 
the discount rate is high, the margin multiple is lower. When customer 
retention rates are higher, margin multiples are higher. 
  The table can be used to compute customer value in this way. If 
you have a customer retention rate of 90 per cent and your WACC is 
12 per cent and your customer generates $100 margin in a year, the 
LTV of the customer is about $400 (or $409 to be precise; i.e. 4.09 times 
$100). The same mathematics can be applied to segments or cohorts of 
customers. Your company may serve two clusters of customers, A and B. 
Customers from cluster A each generate annual margin of $400; cluster 
B customers each generate $200 margin. Retention rates vary between 
clusters. Cluster A has a retention rate of 80 per cent; cluster B customers 
have a retention rate of 90 per cent. If the same WACC of 12 per cent 
is applied to both clusters, then the LTV of a customer from cohort 
A is $1000 ($400      /H11003      2.50), and the LTV of a cohort B customer is $818 
($200      /H11003      4.09). If you have 500 customers in cluster A, and 1000 customers 
in cluster B, the LTV of your customer base is $1 318 000, computed thus: 
((500      /H11003      $1000)      /H11001      (1000      /H11003      $818)). 
  Application of this formula means that you do not have to estimate 
customer tenure. As customer retention rate rises there is an automatic 
lift in customer tenure, as shown in Table 2.2 in Chapter 2. This formula 
can be adjusted to consider change in both future margins and retention 
rates either up or down, as described in Gupta and Lehmann’s book 
Managing Customers as Investments .
5
   The table can be used to assess the impact of a number of customer 
management strategies: what would be the impact of reducing cost-to-
serve by shifting customers to low-cost self-serve channels? What would 
be the result of cross-selling higher margin products? What would be 
the outcome of a loyalty programme designed to increase retention rate 
from 80 to 82 per cent? 
  An important additional beneﬁ  t of this LTV calculation is that it 
enables you to estimate a company’s value. For example, it has been 
computed that the LTV of the average US-based American Airlines 
Table 5.1        Margin 
multiples  
Retention rate Discount rate
10% 12% 14% 16%
60% 1.20 1.15 1.11 1.07
70% 1.75 1.67 1.59 1.52
80% 2.67 2.50 2.35 2.22
90% 4.50 4.09 3.75 3.46

===== PAGE 166 =====
 
Customer portfolio management 143
customer is $166.94. American Airlines has 43.7 million such customers, 
yielding an estimated company value of $7.3 billion. Roland Rust and his 
co-researchers noted that, given the absence of international passengers 
and freight considerations from this computation, it was remarkably 
close to the company’s market capitalization at the time their research 
was undertaken.  
6
    Data mining 
   The ﬁ fth discipline that can be used for CPM is data mining. It has 
particular value when you are trying to ﬁ  nd patterns or relationships 
in large volumes of data, as found in B2C contexts such as retailing, 
banking and home shopping. 
  An international retailing operation like Tesco, for example, has over 
14       million Clubcard members in its UK customer base. Not only does 
the company have the demographic data that the customer provided on 
becoming a club member, but also the customer’s transactional data. If 
ten million club members use Tesco in a week and purchase an average 
basket of 30 items, Tesco’s database grows by 300       million pieces of data 
per week. This is certainly a huge cost, but potentially a major beneﬁ t. 
   Data mining can be thought of as the creation of intelligence from large 
quantities of data. Customer portfolio management needs intelligent 
answers to questions such as these: 
    1.     How can we segment the market to identify potential customers?  
    2.     How can we cluster our current customers? 
    3.     Which customers offer the greatest potential for the future?  
    4.     Which customers are most likely to switch? 
   Data mining can involve the use of statistically advanced techniques, 
but fortunately managers do not need to be technocrats. It is generally 
sufﬁ cient to understand what the tools can do, how to interpret the 
results, and how to perform data mining. 
   Two of the major vendors of data mining tools have developed 
models to guide users through the data mining process. SAS promotes 
a ﬁ ve-step data mining process called SEMMA (sample, explore, modify, 
model, assess) and SPSS opts for the 5As (assess, access, analyse, act and 
automate). These models, though different in detail, essentially promote 
a common step-wise approach. The ﬁ  rst step involves deﬁ  ning the 
business problem (such as the examples listed above). Then you have to 
create a data mining database. Best practice involves extracting historical 
data from the data warehouse, creating a special mining data mart, and 
exploring that dataset for the patterns and relationships that can solve 
your business problem. The problem-solving step involves an iterative 
process of model-building, testing and reﬁ  nement. Data miners often 
divide their dataset into two subsets. One is used for model training, 
i.e. estimating the model parameters, and the other is used for model 
validation. Once a model is developed that appears to solve the business 

===== PAGE 167 =====
 
144 Customer Relationship Management
problem, it can be adopted by management. As new data is loaded into 
the data warehouse, further subsets can be extracted to the data mining 
data mart and the model can be subjected to further reﬁ nement. 
  A number of different data mining tools are applicable to CPM 
problems: clustering, decision trees and neural networks. 
    Clustering 
   Clustering techniques are used to ﬁ  nd naturally occurring groupings 
within a dataset. As applied to customer data, these techniques generally 
function as follows: 
    1.     Each customer is allocated to just one group. The customer possesses 
attributes that are more closely associated with that group than any 
other group.  
    2.     Each group is relatively homogenous. 
    3.     The groups collectively are very different from each other.    
   In other words, clustering techniques generally try to maximize both 
within-group homogeneity and between-group heterogeneity. There 
are a number of clustering techniques, including CART (classiﬁ  cation 
and regression trees) and CHAID (chi-square automatic interaction 
detection).
7   Once statistically homogenous clusters have been formed 
they need to be interpreted. 
  CRM strategists are often interested in the future behaviours of a 
customer: segment, cohort or individual. Customers ’  potential value is 
determined by their propensity to buy products in the future. Data miners 
can build predictive models by examining patterns and relationships 
within historic data. Predictive models can be generated to identify: 
    1.     Which customer, segment or cohort is most likely to buy a given 
product?  
    2.     Which customers are likely to default on payment? 
    3.     Which customers are most likely to defect (churn)? 
   Data analysts scour historic data looking for predictor and outcome 
variables. Then a model is built and validated on these historic data. 
When the model seems to work well on the historic data, it is run on 
contemporary data, where the predictor data are known but the outcome 
data are not. This is known as  ‘ scoring ’ . Scores are answers to questions 
such as the propensity-to-buy, default and churn questions listed above. 
   Predictive modelling is based on three assumptions, each of which 
may be true to a greater or lesser extent:   
8
    1.     The past is a good predictor of the future  …  BUT this may not be true. 
Sales of many products are cyclical or seasonal. Others have fashion 
or fad lifecycles.  
    2.     The data are available  …  BUT this may not be true. Data used to 
train the model may no longer be collected. Data may be too costly to 
collect, or may be in the wrong format.  

===== PAGE 168 =====
 
Customer portfolio management 145
    3.     Customer-related databases contain what you want to predict  …  BUT 
this may not be true. The data may not be available. If you want to 
predict which customers are most likely to buy mortgage protection 
insurance, and you only have data on life policies, you will not be 
able to answer the question. 
   Two tools that are used for predicting future behaviours are decision 
trees and neural networks.  
    Decision trees 
   Decision trees are so called because the graphical model output has 
the appearance of a branch structure. Decision trees work by analysing 
a dataset to ﬁ  nd the independent variable that, when used to split the 
population, results in nodes that are most different from each other with 
respect to the variable you are tying to predict.  Figure 5.12    contains a set 
of data about ﬁ ve customers and their credit risk proﬁ le.  
9
Income
High
High
High
Low
Low
Married?
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Risk
Good
Good
Poor 
Poor 
Poor 
Name
Joe
Sue
John
Mary
Fred
Debt
High
Low
Low
High
Low
 Figure 5.12 
      Credit risk training 
set    
   We want to use the data in four of the ﬁ ve columns to predict the risk 
rating in the ﬁ  fth column. A decision tree can be constructed for this 
purpose.
   In decision tree analysis, Risk is in the  ‘ dependent ’  column. This is also 
known as the target variable. The other four columns are independent 
columns. It is unlikely that the customer’s name is a predictor of Risk, 
so we will use the three other pieces of data as independent variables: 
debt, income and marital status. In the example, each of these is a simple 
categorical item, each of which only has two possible values (high or 
low; yes or no). The data from  Figure 5.12  are represented in a different 
form in Figure 5.13   , in a way which lets you see which independent 
variable is best at predicting risk. As you examine the data, you will see 
that the best split is income (four instances highlighted in bold on the 
diagonal: two high income/good risk plus two low income/poor risk). 
Debt and marital status each score three on their diagonals. 
   Once a node is split, the same process is performed on each successive 
node, either until no further splits are possible or until you have reached 
a managerially useful model. 

===== PAGE 169 =====
 
146 Customer Relationship Management
   The graphical output of this decision tree analysis is shown in  Figure 
5.14   . Each box is a node. Nodes are linked by branches. The top node is 
the root node. The data from the root node is split into two groups based 
on income. The right-hand, low income box, does not split any further 
because both low income customers are classiﬁ  ed as poor credit risks. 
The left-hand, high-income box does split further, into married and 
not married customers. Neither of these split further because the one 
unmarried customer is a poor credit risk and the two remaining married 
customers are good credit risks. 
Income
LowHigh
Married?
YesNo
Good
Poor
Total
(0)
(1)
1
0.0%
100.0%
20.0%
Good
Poor
Total
(2)
(0)
2
100.0%
0.0%
40.0%
Good
Poor
Total
Good
Poor
Total
Good
Poor
Total
(2)
(1)
3
(0)
(2)
2
(2)
(3)
5
66.7%
33.3%
60.0%
0.0%
100.0%
40.0%
40.0%
60.0%
 Figure 5.14 
      Decision tree output    
Predicted
risk
Good
Poor
High
debt
Low
debt
High
income
Low
income Married Not
married
2 00 2
11
11
21 2 2 Figure 5.13 
      Cross-tabulation 
of dependent 
and independent 
variables    
  As a result of this process the company knows that customers who 
have the lowest credit risk will be high income and married. They will 
also note that debt, one of the variables inserted into the training model, 
did not perform well. It is not a predictor of creditworthiness. Decision 

===== PAGE 170 =====
 
Customer portfolio management 147
trees that work with categorical data such as these are known as 
classiﬁ cation trees. When decision trees are applied to continuous data 
they are known as regression trees.  
    Neural networks 
   Neural networks are another way of ﬁ tting a model to existing data for 
prediction purposes. The expression  ‘ neural network ’  has its origins in 
the work of machine learning and artiﬁ  cial intelligence. Researchers in 
this ﬁ eld have tried to learn from the natural neural networks of living 
creatures. 
   Neural networks can produce excellent predictions from large and 
complex datasets containing hundreds of interactive predictor variables, 
but the neural networks are neither easy to understand nor straightforward 
to use. Neural networks represent complex mathematical equations, with 
many summations, exponential functions and parameters.  
10
   Like decision trees and clustering techniques, neural networks need to 
be trained to recognize patterns on sample datasets. Once trained, they 
can be used to predict customer behaviour from new data. They work 
well when there are many potential predictor variables, some of which 
are redundant.
       Case 5.2   
  Customer portfolio management at Tesco      
   Tesco, the largest and most successful supermarket chain in the UK, has developed a CRM 
strategy that is the envy of many of its competitors. Principally a food retailer in a mature 
market that has grown little in the last 20 years, Tesco realized that the only route to growth 
was taking market share from competitors. Consequently, the development of a CRM 
strategy was seen as imperative. 
   In developing its CRM strategy, Tesco ﬁ rst analysed its customer base. It found that the 
top 100 customers were worth the same as the bottom 4000. It also found that the bottom 
25 per cent of customers represented only 2 per cent of sales, and that the top 5 per cent of 
customers were responsible for 20 per cent of sales. 
   The results of this analysis were used to segment Tesco’s customers and to develop its 
successful loyalty programmes.        
    CPM in the business-to-
business context 
   Many B2B companies classify their customers into groups based on 
sales revenue. They believe that their best customers are their biggest 
customers. Some of these companies consciously apply the Pareto 

===== PAGE 171 =====
 
148 Customer Relationship Management
principle, recognizing that 80 per cent of sales are made to 20 per cent of 
customers, as shown in  Figure 5.15   .  
Top 20%
by volume
Bottom 20%
by volume
Quintile
Sales
 Figure 5.15 
      The Pareto 
principle, or 
80:20 rule    
   Having clustered their customers by volume, they may then assign 
their best representatives, and offer the best service and terms of trade to 
these, the biggest and best customers. The assumption is often made in 
B2B contexts that large accounts are proﬁ  table accounts. Activity-based 
costing tells us that this is not necessarily so. It is not uncommon to ﬁ  nd 
that small customers are unproﬁ  table because their activity costs are 
greater than the margins they generate. Similarly, many companies ﬁ  nd 
that their largest accounts are also unproﬁ  table. Why? Large accounts 
create more work, more activity. The work of managing the account 
might require the services of a large number of people: a sales manager, 
a customer service executive and an applications engineer among others. 
The customer might demand customized product, delivery in less than 
container loads, just-in-time delivery, extended due dates for payment, 
and, ultimately, volume discounts on price. Very often it is the mid-
range sales volume customers that are the most proﬁ  table.  Figure 5.16    
shows the proﬁ tability of customers who have been previously clustered 
according to volume. The chart shows that the top 20 per cent of 
customers by volume are unproﬁ table, just as are the bottom 20 per cent 
by volume. 
   When Kanthal, a Swedish manufacturer of electrical resistance 
heating elements, introduced ABC they found that only 40 per cent of 
their customers were proﬁ  table. Two of their top three sales volume 
customers were among the most unproﬁ table. The most proﬁ table 5 per 
cent of customers generated 150 per cent of proﬁ  ts. The least proﬁ table 
10 per cent lost 120 per cent of proﬁ  t. The challenge for Kanthal was 
deciding what to do with the unproﬁ  table customers. 
11   Their options 

===== PAGE 172 =====
 
Customer portfolio management 149
included implementation of open book accounting so their customers 
could see how much it cost to serve them, negotiation of service levels 
with customers, introducing transparent rules for migrating customers 
up and down the service level ladder, simplifying and standardizing 
the order process, introducing a self-service portal, negotiating price 
increases, sorting product lines into those that could be delivered ex-
stock and others for which advance orders were required, and rewarding 
account managers for customer proﬁ  tability, both by per cent margin 
and total Krona (Crown) value. 
    Customer portfolio models 
   Since the early 1980s there have been a number of tools speciﬁ  cally 
designed for assessing B2B companies ’  customer portfolios. 12   They 
generally classify existing customers using a matrix and measurement 
approach. Many of these contributions have their origins in the work of 
the IMP (Industrial Marketing and Purchasing) group that you can read 
about in Chapter 2. CPM in B2B companies uses one or more variables 
to cluster customers; the most common single variable approach is to 
use sales revenue to cluster companies. You now know that this does not 
necessarily deliver a satisfactory proﬁ t outcome. 
    Bivariate models 
  Benson Shapiro and his colleagues developed a customer portfolio model 
that importantly incorporated the idea of cost-to-serve into the evaluation 
of customer value. 13    Figure 5.17    presents the matrix they developed. 
Volume quintile
Quintile profitability
 Figure 5.16 
      Customer 
proﬁ tability by sales 
volume quintile    

===== PAGE 173 =====
 
150 Customer Relationship Management
   In this model customers are classiﬁ  ed according to the price they 
pay and the costs incurred by the company to acquire and serve them. 
Four classes of customer are identiﬁ  ed: carriage trade (often newly 
acquired customers who are costly to serve but pay a relatively high 
price), passive customers, aggressive customers and bargain basement 
customers. The important contribution of this model is that it recognizes 
that costs are not evenly distributed across the customer base. Some 
customers are more costly to win and serve and, if this is accompanied 
by a relatively low received price, the customer may be unproﬁ  table. 
 Table 5.2    shows how costs can vary before the sale, in production, in 
distribution and after the sale. 
Passive
Received price
Low
Low High
Cost-to-serve
High
Carriage
trade
Bargain basement Aggressive
 Figure 5.17 
      Shapiro et al. 
customer
classiﬁ cation matrix    
Pre-sale costs Production costs Distribution costs Post-sale costs
Geographic location: 
close versus distant
Order size Shipment consolidation Training
Prospecting Set-up time Preferred transportation 
mode
Installation
Sampling Scrap rate Back-haul opportunity Technical 
support
Human resource: management 
versus representatives
Customization Location: close versus 
distant
Repairs and 
maintenance
Service: design support, 
applications engineering
Order timing Logistics support, 
e.g. ﬁ  eld inventory
Table 5.2        How 
costs vary between 
customers  

===== PAGE 174 =====
 
Customer portfolio management 151
   Renato Fiocca created an advance in customer portfolio modelling 
when he introduced his two-step approach.  14   At the ﬁ rst step customers 
are classiﬁ ed according to: 
    1.     the strategic importance of the customer 
    2.     the difﬁ culty of managing the relationship with the customer.    
   The strategic importance of a customer is determined by: 
●      the value/volume of the customer’s purchases  
●      the potential and prestige of the customer  
●      customer market leadership 
●      general desirability in terms of diversiﬁ  cation of the supplier’s 
markets, providing access to new markets, improving technological 
expertise and the impact on other relationships.  
 The difﬁ culty of managing the customer relationship is related to: 
●      product characteristics, such as novelty and complexity  
●      account characteristics, such as the customer’s needs and requirements, 
customer’s buying behaviour, customer’s power, customer’s technical 
and commercial competence and the customer’s preference to do 
business with a number of suppliers 
●      competition for the account, which is assessed by considering the 
number of competitors, the strength and weaknesses of competitors 
and the competitors ’  position vis à vis the customer. 
   On the basis of this information it is possible to construct a two-
dimensional matrix as in  Figure 5.18   .  
Key
difficult
Difficulty in managing the customer
Strategic importance of the account
woL
LowHigh
High
Non-key
difficult
Key
easy
Non-key
easy
 Figure 5.18 
      Fiocca’s CPM model: 
step 1    

===== PAGE 175 =====
 
152 Customer Relationship Management
   The second step involves further analysis of the key accounts, shown 
in the left-hand cells of  Figure 5.18 . They are classiﬁ ed according to: 
●      the customer’s business attractiveness  
●      the relative strength of the buyer/seller relationship.    
  The attractiveness of the customer’s business is strongly inﬂ  uenced by 
conditions in the customer’s served market. Fiocca identiﬁ  es these as 
market factors, competition, ﬁ nancial and economic factors, technological 
factors and socio-political factors, as detailed in  Table 5.3   .  
   Market factors 
   Size of key segments served by customer 
   Customer’s share of key segments 
   Customer’s growth rate 
   Customer’s inﬂ  uence on the market 
   Competition in the customer’s market 
   Customer’s position and strength 
   Customer’s vulnerability to substitutes 
   Customer’s level of integration 
 Socio-political factors 
 Customer’s ability to adapt and ﬁ  t 
 Financial and economic factors 
 Customer’s margins 
 Customer’s scale and experience 
 Barriers to customer’s entry or exit 
 Customer’s capacity utilization 
 Technological factors 
 Customer’s ability to cope with change 
 Depth of customer’s skills 
 Types of technological know-how 
 Level of customer patent protection 
Table 5.3        Factors 
inﬂ uencing 
the customer’s 
attractiveness
(Fiocca’s model)  
   The strength of the customer relationship is determined by: 
●      the length of relationship 
●      the volume or dollar value of purchases  
●      the importance of the customer (percentage of supplier’s sales accounted 
for by this customer) 
●      personal friendships 
●      cooperation in product development 
●      management distance (language and culture) 
●      geographical distance. 
   The data from this second step are then entered into a ﬁ  nal nine-cell 
matrix, as shown in Figure 5.19   , which point to three core customer 
management strategies: hold, withdraw or improve. 
   There have been a couple of published validations of this model, 15   but 
it has been criticized for its failure to consider customer proﬁ tability, and 
its rejection of non-key customers at step 1.  

===== PAGE 176 =====
 
Customer portfolio management 153
    Trivariate CPM model 
   Peter Turnbull and Judy Zolkiewski have developed a three-dimensional 
CPM framework as shown in Figure 5.20   .  16   The dimensions they 
propose are cost-to-serve, net price and relationship value. The ﬁ  rst two 
variables are adopted from the Shapiro model. Relationship value, the 
third dimension, allows other strategic issues to be taken into account. 
HighLow
Customer’s business attractiveness
Strong Medium Weak
Relationship strength
Strategic options
WithdrawHold the position Improve relationship strength
 Figure 5.19 
      Fiocca’s CPM model: 
step 2    
High
Low
Low
Relationship
value
HighLow
High
Net price
Cost to serve  Figure 5.20 
      Turnbull and 
Zolkiewski’s 
three-dimensional
customer
classiﬁ cation matrix    

===== PAGE 177 =====
 
154 Customer Relationship Management
Relationship value is ‘ softer ’  or more judgemental than the other 
two dimensions. Among the questions considered when forming a 
judgement on relationship value are the following: 
    1.     Are the goods or services critical to the customer? 
    2.     Is the customer a major generator of volume for the supplier?  
    3.     Would the customer be hard to replace if he switched to another 
supplier?
    4.     Does the customer generate cost savings for the supplier? 
    Additional customer 
portfolio management 
tools
   In addition to speciﬁ cally designed CPM tools there are a number of 
other tools in common use for strategic planning. These can also be very 
useful for CRM applications. These tools, however, operate at company-
speciﬁ c levels. This means that a CRM strategist would apply the tools 
to a speciﬁ c customer to help in the assessment of that customer’s future 
value. Among the tools are SWOT analysis, PESTE analysis, ﬁ  ve-forces 
analysis and BCG matrix analysis. 
  We’ll introduce them here brieﬂ y. For a fuller report you’d be well 
advised to refer to any basic corporate strategy or marketing strategy book. 
    SWOT and PESTE 
   SWOT is an acronym for strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and 
threats. SWOT analysis explores the internal environment (S and W) 
and the external environment (O and T) of a strategic business unit. The 
internal (SW) audit looks for strengths and weaknesses in the business 
functions of sales, marketing, manufacturing or operations, ﬁ  nance and 
people management. It then looks cross-functionally for strengths and 
weaknesses in, for example, cross-functional processes (such as new 
product development) and organizational culture. 
   The external (OT) audit analyses the macro- and micro-environments 
in which the customer operates. The macro-environment includes 
a number of broad conditions that might impact on a company. These 
conditions are identiﬁ ed by a PESTE analysis. PESTE is an acronym for 
political, economic, social, technological and environmental conditions. 
An analysis would try to pick out major conditions that impact on 
a business, as illustrated below: 
●       political environment : demand for international air travel contracted 
as worldwide political stability was reduced after September 11, 2001  
●       economic environment  : demand for mortgages falls when the 
economy enters recession  

===== PAGE 178 =====
 
Customer portfolio management 155
●       social environment : as a population ages, demand for healthcare and 
residential homes increase  
●       technological environment  : as more households become owners of 
computers, demand for Internet banking increases  
●       environmental conditions : as customers become more concerned about 
environmental quality, demand for more energy efﬁ  cient products 
increases. 
   The micro environmental part of the external (OT) audit examines 
relationships between a company and its immediate external stake-
holders: customers, suppliers, business partners and investors. 
  A CRM-oriented SWOT analysis would be searching for customers or 
potential customers that emerge well from the analysis. These would be 
customers that: 
    1.     possess relevant strengths to exploit the opportunities open to them  
    2.     are overcoming weaknesses by partnering with other organizations to 
take advantage of opportunities  
    3.     are investing in turning around the company to exploit the 
opportunities
    4.     are responding to external threats in their current markets by 
exploiting their strengths for diversiﬁ cation.    
    Five forces 
   The ﬁ ve-forces analysis was developed by Michael Porter.  17   He claimed 
that the proﬁ tability of an industry, as measured by its return on capital 
employed relative to its cost of capital, was determined by ﬁ  ve sources 
of competitive pressure. These ﬁ ve sources include three horizontal and 
two vertical conditions. The horizontal conditions are: 
●      competition within the established businesses in the market  
●      competition from potential new entrants  
●      competition from potential substitutes. 
          The vertical conditions reﬂ ect supply and demand chain considerations: 
●      the bargaining power of buyers 
●      the bargaining power of suppliers. 
   Porter’s basic premise is that competitors in an industry will be more 
proﬁ table if these ﬁ ve conditions are benign. For example, if buyers are 
very powerful, they can demand high levels of service and low prices, 
thus negatively inﬂ  uencing the proﬁ tability of the supplier. However, if 
barriers to entry are high, say because of large capital requirements or 
dominance of the market by very powerful brands, then current players 
will be relatively immune from new entrants and enjoy the possibility of 
better proﬁ ts. 
   Why would a CRM-strategist be interested in a ﬁ  ve-forces evaluation 
of customers? Fundamentally, a ﬁ  nancially healthy customer offers 

===== PAGE 179 =====
 
156 Customer Relationship Management
better potential for a supplier than a customer in ﬁ  nancial distress. The 
analysis points to different CRM solutions: 
    1.     Customers in a proﬁ table industry are more likely to be stable for 
the near-term, and are better placed to invest in opportunities for 
the future. They therefore have stronger value potential. These are 
customers with whom a supplier would want to build an exclusive 
and well-protected relationship.  
    2.     Customers in a stressed industry might be looking for reduced cost 
inputs from its suppliers, or for other ways that they can add value to 
their offer to their own customers. A CRM-oriented supplier would 
be trying to ﬁ nd ways to serve this customer more effectively, perhaps 
by stripping out elements of the value proposition that are not critical, 
or by adding elements that enable the customer to compete more 
strongly.      
    BCG matrix 
  The Boston Consulting Group matrix was designed to analyse a company’s 
product portfolio with a view to drawing strategy prescriptions. The 
analysis takes into account two criteria, relative market share and market 
growth rate, to identify where proﬁ  ts and cash ﬂ  ow are earned.  Figure 
5.21    is a sample BCG matrix. The BCG claims that the best indicator of 
a market’s attractiveness is its growth rate (hence the vertical axis of the 
matrix) and that the best indicator of competitive strength is relative 
market share (the horizontal axis). Relative market share, that is the market 
share of the business unit relative to its largest competitor, is claimed to 
improve the relative cost position due to the experience curve. 
Star
Relative market share
Market growth
10x
Low
0.1x
High Question mark
Cash cow
1x
Cash use equals
cash generation Heavy cash users
Cash generators Cash users
Strategy:
Grow and build
Strategy:
Aggressive growth
or divest
Strategy:
Maintain and milk
Strategy:
Divest
Product evolution Direction of cash movement
Dog
 Figure 5.21 
      Boston Consulting 
Group matrix    

===== PAGE 180 =====
 
Customer portfolio management 157
   The matrix categorizes products in a portfolio into one of four boxes 
and prescribes certain strategies: milk the cows, invest in the stars, ditch 
the dogs and then sort the question marks into those that you want to 
support as they become stars, and the remainder that you expect to 
convert into dogs. 
  A balanced portfolio of products contains question marks, stars and 
cash cows. Cash cows generate the cash ﬂ  ow that supports the question 
marks. As the question marks grow their relative market share, and 
become stars, they are establishing a position in the market that will 
eventually yield strong positive cash ﬂ ows. This happens when a leading 
product maintains that position in a mature market. 
   From a CRM perspective, a customer with a balanced portfolio of 
products of its own has greater lifetime potential for a supplier than 
a customer with an unbalanced portfolio. A company with no new 
products in the pipeline will struggle to remain viable when the existing 
cash cows dry up. This happens as competitors ﬁ ght to win market share 
and substitutes emerge. 
    Strategically signiﬁ cant 
customers
  The goal of this entire analytical process is to cluster customers into groups 
so that differentiated value propositions and relationship management 
strategies can be applied. One outcome will be the identiﬁ  cation of 
customers that will be strategically signiﬁ cant for the company’s future. 
We call these strategically signiﬁ cant customers (SSCs). There are several 
classes of SSC, as follows: 
   1 .       High future lifetime value customers : these customers will contribute 
signiﬁ cantly to the company’s proﬁ tability in the future. 
    2 .       High volume customers  : these customers might not generate much 
proﬁ t, but they are strategically signiﬁ cant because of their absorption 
of ﬁ xed costs, and the economies of scale they generate to keep unit 
costs low.  
    3 .       Benchmark customers  : these are customers that other customers 
follow. For example, Nippon Conlux supplies the hardware and 
software for Coca Cola’s vending operation. While they might not 
make much margin from that relationship, it has allowed them to gain 
access to many other markets.  ‘ If we are good enough for Coke, we 
are good enough for you ’ , is the implied promise. Some IT companies 
create  ‘ reference sites ’  at some of their more demanding customers.  
    4 .       Inspirations : these are customers who bring about improvement in 
the supplier’s business. They may identify new applications for a 
product, product improvements, or opportunities for cost reductions. 
They may complain loudly and make unreasonable demands, but in 
doing so, force change for the better.  

===== PAGE 181 =====
 
158 Customer Relationship Management
    5 .       Door openers  : these are customers that allow the supplier to gain 
access to a new market. This may be done for no initial proﬁ  t, but 
with a view to proving credentials for further expansion. This may 
be particularly important if crossing cultural boundaries, say between 
west and east. 
  One company, a Scandinavian processor of timber, has identiﬁ  ed ﬁ ve 
major customer groups that are strategically signiﬁ cant, as in  Figure 5.22   .
1.  Economic return
2.  Future business potential
3.  Learning value
4.  Reference value
5.  Strategic value by
providing access to new markets
strengthening incumbent positions
building barriers to new entrants
This company considers 5 attributes in identifying their
strategically significant customers 
 Figure 5.22 
      Strategically 
signiﬁ cant 
customers at a 
Scandinavian timber 
processor    
    The seven core customer 
management strategies 
   This sort of analysis pays off when it helps companies develop and 
implement differentiated CRM strategies for clusters of customers in the 
portfolio. There are several core customer management strategies: 
    1 .       Protect the relationship  : this makes sense when the customer is 
strategically signiﬁ cant and attractive to competitors. We discuss the 
creation of exit barriers in our review of customer retention strategies 
in Chapter 9.  
   2 .       Re-engineer the relationship : in this case, the customer is currently 
unproﬁ table or less proﬁ  table than desired. However, the customer 
could be converted to proﬁ  t if costs were trimmed from the 
relationship. This might mean reducing or automating service levels, 
or servicing customers through lower cost channels. In the banking 
industry, transaction processing costs, as a multiple of online processing 
costs are as follows. If Internet transaction processing has a unit cost 
of 1, an in-bank teller transaction costs 120 units, an ATM transaction 
costs 40, telephone costs 30 and PC banking costs 20. In other words, 
it is 120 times more expensive to conduct an in-bank transaction than 
the identical online transaction. Cost-reduction programmes have 

===== PAGE 182 =====
 
Customer portfolio management 159
motivated banks to migrate their customers, or at least some segments 
of customers, to other lower cost channels. An Australian electricity 
company has found that its average annual margin per customer is 
$60. It costs $13 to serve a customer who pays by credit card, but only 
64 cents to service a direct debit customer. Each customer moved to 
the lower cost channel therefore produces a transaction cost saving of 
more than $12, which increases the average customer value by 20 per 
cent. Re-engineering a relationship requires a clear understanding of 
the activities that create costs in the relationship (see Case 5.3). 
    3 .       Enhance the relationship  : like the strategy above, the goal is to 
migrate the customer up the value ladder. In this case it is done not 
by re-engineering the relationship, but by increasing your share of 
customer spend on the category, and by identifying up-selling and 
cross-selling opportunities.  
    4 .       Harvest the relationship  : when your share of wallet is stable, and 
you do not want to invest more resources in customer development, 
you may feel that the customer has reached maximum value. Under 
these conditions you may wish to harvest, that is, optimize cash 
ﬂ ow from the customer with a view to using the cash generated to 
develop other customers. This may be particularly appealing if the 
customer is in a declining market, has a high cost-to-serve or has 
a high propensity-to-switch to competitors.  
   5 .       End the relationship : sacking customers is generally anathema to sales 
and marketing people. However, when the customer shows no sign of 
making a signiﬁ cant contribution in the future it may be the best option. 
You can read about strategies for sacking customers in Chapter 9. 
    6 .       Win back the customer  : sometimes customers take some or all 
of their business to other suppliers. If they are not strategically 
signiﬁ cant, it may make sense to let them go. However, when the 
customer is important, you may need to develop and implement win 
back strategies. The starting point must be to understand why they 
took their business away.  
    7 .       Start a relationship  : you’ve identiﬁ ed a prospect as having potential 
strategic signiﬁ  cance for the future. You need to develop an 
acquisition plan to recruit the customer onto the value ladder. You 
can read about customer acquisition strategies in Chapter 8. 
       Case 5.3   
  Sales support varies by segment at Syngenta      
   Syngenta, a leading global agribusiness organization, sought to segment the global market 
for crop protection products, such as herbicides and pesticides. Using qualitative and 
quantitative data Syngenta identiﬁ ed four segments among farmers. 
    1.      ‘ Professionals ’ : these are large spenders and keen to trial new technologies. 
    2.      ‘ Progressives ’ : these have large landholdings and are early adopters of new technologies. 

===== PAGE 183 =====
 
160 Customer Relationship Management
    3.      ‘ Traditionalists ’ : these are older and spend the least on crop protection products. 
    4.      ‘ Operators ’ : these are pessimistic about farming and have difﬁ culty in keeping up to date 
with new technologies and farming practices. 
   Syngenta now uses these four segments to guide all of its marketing activities. Service levels 
vary between segments. Face-to-face communications are available to professionals and 
progressives, and direct mail is used for traditionalists and operators. 
        Summary      
   In this chapter you have learned about customer portfolio management. CPM is an 
essential component of strategic CRM. CPM is underpinned by analysis that clusters 
customers into groups that can then be treated to differentiated value propositions 
and customer management strategies. It strives to do this by estimating the current 
and future value of each group, taking into account the revenues each group will 
generate and the costs that will be incurred in acquiring and serving those customers. 
A number of basic disciplines underpin the CPM process: market segmentation, sales 
forecasting, activity-based costing, customer lifetime value estimation, and data 
mining. Market segmentation, which is widely practised by marketing management, 
needs to have a clear focus on customer value when used for CPM purposes. A number 
of sales forecasting techniques can also be used to estimate what customers are likely 
to buy in the future. Activity-based costing enables companies to understand the costs 
of marketing, selling and servicing customers, and consequently customer proﬁ  tability. 
Customer lifetime value estimation models can be used to evaluate a customer’s future 
worth to a company, and data mining techniques are particularly useful for detecting 
patterns and relationships within historic customer data. 
   The CPM processes tend to differ from business-to-consumer to business-to-business 
contexts. Not only have a number of portfolio analysis tools been developed speciﬁ cally 
for B2B contexts, but activity-based costing is more easily applied in B2B contexts, 
whereas data mining is more visible in B2C contexts. 
   The purpose of all this analysis is to disaggregate potential and current customers into 
subsets so that different value propositions and relationship management strategies can 
be developed for each group. We close the chapter by identifying seven core customer 
management strategies that can be applied selectively across the customer portfolio.        
  References  
       1.          Levitt ,    T.                ( 1960 )        Marketing myopia .            Harvard Business Review        ,  July–
August         , pp.  45  –       56        .  
       2.          Day ,    G.S.             ( 1986 )        Analysis for strategic market decisions             .   St Paul, MN:
West Publishing                    .   

===== PAGE 184 =====
 
Customer portfolio management 161
       3.          Cokins ,    G.             ( 1996 )        Activity-based cost management: making it work             .     
      London: McGraw-Hill              .  
       4.          Gupta ,    S.   and   Lehmann ,    D.R.             ( 2005 )        Managing customers 
as investments: the strategic value of customers in the long run             .     
      Philadelphia: Wharton School Publishing              .  
       5.          Gupta ,    S.   and   Lehmann ,    D.R.             ( 2005 )        Managing customers 
as investments: the strategic value of customers in the long run             .     
      Philadelphia: Wharton School Publishing              .  
       6.          Rust ,    R.T.  ,   Lemon ,    K.N.   and   Narayandas ,    D.             ( 2005 )        Customer equity 
management            .         Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall              .  
       7.          Saunders ,    J.             ( 1994 )       Cluster analysis .        In:       G.J.     Hooley   and   M.K.     Hussey  
(eds)       .      Quantitative methods in marketing           .         London: Dryden Press      , pp. 
 1 3   –        2 8         .   
       8.          Berry ,    M.J.A.   and   Linoff ,    G.S.             ( 2000 )        Data mining: the art and science of 
customer relationship management             .         New York: John Wiley              .  
       9.         The illustration is taken from Brand, E. and Gerritsen, R.  Decision
Trees . Available online at  http://www.dbmsmag.com/9807m05.html 
      10.          Berry ,    M.J.A.   and   Linoff ,    G.S.             ( 2000 )        Data mining: the art and science of 
customer relationship management             .         New York: John Wiley              .  
      11.         Kanthal, A. Harvard Business School case study number 9–190–002. 
Robert S. Kaplan, author.      
      12.         Reviewed by Zolkiewski, J. and Turnbull, P . (1999)  A review of 
customer relationships planning: does customer proﬁ  tability and portfolio 
analysis provide the key to successful relationship management?   UMIST, 
Manchester, UK: MSM Working Paper Series. See also Zolkiewski, J. 
(2005) Customer portfolios. Blackwell Encyclopaedia of Marketing , pp. 
1–87, and Johnson, M.D. and Selnes, F. (2004) Customer portfolio 
management: towards a dynamic theory of exchange relationships. 
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 68(2), pp. 1–17. 
      13.          Shapiro ,   B.P .  ,   Rangan ,    K.V .  ,   Moriarty ,    R.T.   and   Ross ,    E.B.                ( 1987 ) 
       Manage customers for proﬁ ts (not just sales) .            Harvard Business 
Review       ,  September–October         , pp.  101  –       108        .  
      14.          Fiocca ,    R.                ( 1982 )        Account portfolio analysis for strategy development .
Industrial Marketing Management       ,  Vol. 11         , pp.  53  –       62        .  
      15.         Turnbull, P .W. and Topcu, S. (1994) Customers ’  proﬁ tability in 
relationship life-cycles. Proceedings of the 10th IMP conference, 
Groningen, Netherlands; Yorke, D.A. and Droussiotis, G. (1994) 
The use of customer portfolio theory: an empirical survey.  Journal of 
Business and Industrial Marketing , Vol. 9(3), pp. 6–18. 
      16.          Turnbull ,    P .   and   Zolkiewski ,    J.             ( 1997 )       Proﬁ tability in customer 
portfolio planning .        In:       D.     Ford  (ed.)       .      Understanding business markets        ,  
 2nd edn.               London: Dryden Press              .  
      17.          Porter ,    M.E.             ( 1980 )        Competitive strategy: techniques for analysing 
industries and competitors             .         New York: Free Press              .          

===== PAGE 185 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 186 =====
 
                Customer relationship 
management and 
customer experience 
 Chapter 6 

===== PAGE 187 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 188 =====
 
           Chapter objectives      
   By the end of this chapter, you will be aware of: 
    1.   a deﬁ nition of customer experience  
    2.   the emergence and importance of the experience economy  
    3.   the differences between goods, services and experiences  
    4.   three key concepts in customer experience management: touchpoint, moment of 
truth and engagement  
    5.   a number of methods for better understanding customer experience  
    6.   a battery of experiential marketing strategies and tools  
    7.   how customer experience is changed by CRM, sometimes for better and sometimes 
for worse  
    8.   four features of CRM applications that have an impact on customer experience.         
    Introduction 
   The introduction of strategic CRM, or the implementation of CRM 
technology, has potentially major consequences for customer experience. 
In this chapter you’ll ﬁ nd out more about customer experience and how 
CRM can change it: often for the better, but sometimes for the worse.  
    What is meant by customer 
experience?
   These days, companies are becoming more interested in managing and 
improving customer experience. Amazon, for example, asserts that 
its mission is to deliver  ‘ high quality end-to-end, order-to-delivery 
customer experience ’ . Customer experience has been described as  ‘ the 
next competitive battleground ’ .
1
   In general terms an experience is an intrapersonal response to, or 
interpretation of, an external stimulus. But, what about  customer
experience? If you were to ask your customers, ‘What is it like doing 
business with us?’ their answers would be descriptions of their customer 
experience. More formally, customer experience can be deﬁ  ned as 
follows:
 Customer experience is the cognitive and affective outcome of the 
customer’s exposure to, or interaction with, a company’s people, 
processes, technologies, products, services and other outputs. 

===== PAGE 189 =====
 
166 Customer Relationship Management
   Let’s pick apart this deﬁ  nition. When customers do business with 
a company they not only buy products, but they are also exposed to, or 
interact with, other types of company output. They might be exposed 
to your company’s television commercials, they might interact with 
a customer service agent in a call centre or they might place an order 
at your company’s sales portal. All these actions contribute to customer 
experience.
   Based on their research in the e-commerce arena, Marian Petre and her 
colleagues wrote: 
  ‘ A customer’s experience with e-commerce extends beyond the 
interaction with the website. It includes ﬁ  nding the website, 
delivery of products, post-sales support, consumption of products 
and services, and so on. It is the “ total customer experience ”  (TCE) 
that inﬂ  uences customers ’  perceptions of value and service quality, 
which consequently affects customer loyalty ’ .
2
  During all these exposures and interactions customers form both cognitive 
impressions (beliefs, thoughts) and affective impressions (feelings, 
attitudes) about value and quality, which in turn inﬂ uence future buying 
and word-of-mouth intentions. One study in the hospitality industry, for 
example, found that 75 per cent of restaurant customers tell others about 
their poor service experiences but only 38 per cent tell others about their 
excellent experiences. Improving customer experience can therefore have 
two referral beneﬁ ts. It can reduce negative word-of-mouth (WOM); it can 
also increase positive WOM. 
  The idea of customer experience has its origins in the work of Joseph 
Pine and James Gilmore.  
3   They suggested that economies have shifted 
through four stages of economic development: extraction of commodities, 
manufacture of goods, delivery of services and staging of experiences, as 
shown in Figure 6.1   . Customers have always had experiences, but Pine 
and Gilmore recognized a new form of value-adding economic activity 
that has previously been hidden or embedded in the service economy 
and they named this the experience economy. 
Stages of economic
development
Extract
commodities
Make
goods
Deliver
services
Stage
experiences
Degree of
customization Lowest Highest
Interaction
with customers None Co-production
Price
strategy
Commodity
pricing Unique price
Value
added None Massive
 Figure 6.1 
      The experience 
economy    

===== PAGE 190 =====
 
Customer relationship management and customer experience 167
    From service to experience 
   Services management experts have identiﬁ  ed a number of special 
attributes that characterize services. Services are performances or acts 
that are: 
●       Intangible–dominant : services cannot be seen, tasted or sensed in 
other ways before consumption. A customer buying an ofﬁ ce cleaning 
service cannot see the service outcome before it has been performed. 
Services are high in experience and credence attributes, but low on 
search attributes. Experience attributes are those attributes that can 
only be experienced by sampling a product. Your last vacation was 
high in experience attributes. You weren’t able to judge fully what it 
would be like before you took the trip. Services like health, insurance 
and investment advice are high in credence attributes. Even when 
you have consumed these services you cannot be sure of the quality 
of the service delivered. How conﬁ  dent are you that your car is well 
serviced by your garage? Search attributes are attributes that can 
be checked out in advance of a purchase. Services are low in these 
because of their intangible–dominant character. Buyers therefore look 
for tangible clues to help them make sensible choices. Perhaps a buyer 
will look at the appearance of the equipment and personnel and view 
testimonials in a ‘ brag-book ’ . Service marketers therefore need to 
manage tangible evidence by ‘ tangibilizing the intangible ’ .  
●       Inseparable : unlike goods that can be manufactured in one time and 
location and consumed at a later time in another location, services 
are produced at the same time and place that they are consumed. 
Your dentist produces service at the same time you consume it. 
This means that service customers are involved in, and sometimes 
co-produce, the service. This co-production means that quality 
is more difﬁ  cult to control and service outcomes are harder to 
guarantee. For example, a correct diagnosis by a doctor depends 
largely on the ability of the patient to recognize and describe his or 
her symptoms. Sometimes service providers ’  best intentions can be 
undone by customer behaviour. Promoters of rock concerts where 
there have been riots know only too well that customer behaviour can 
change the fundamental character of a concert experience. Sometimes, 
other customers participate in the service experience, making it 
more, or less, satisfying. In a bar, other customers create atmosphere, 
adding to the value of the experience. In a cinema, ringing mobile 
phones and talkative patrons can spoil an otherwise excellent movie 
experience.
●       Heterogeneous : unlike goods that can be mechanically reproduced 
to exact speciﬁ cations and tolerances, services cannot. Many services 
are produced by people. People do no always behave as scripted or 
trained. A band can perform brilliantly one weekend but  ‘ die ’  the 
next. Sometimes the service outcome is co-produced by customer 
and service provider. All of these factors make it hard for companies 
to guarantee the content and quality of a service encounter. Many 
services, for example in the ﬁ  nancial services sector, are becoming 

===== PAGE 191 =====
 
168 Customer Relationship Management
increasingly automated in order to reduce the unacceptably variable 
level of quality that is associated with human interaction. Many 
customer service centres now script their service agents ’  interactions 
with customers to eliminate unacceptable customer experience.  
●       Perishable : services cannot be held in inventory for sale at a later 
time. A hotel room that is unoccupied on Monday night cannot be 
added to the inventory for Tuesday night. The opportunity to provide 
service and make a sale is gone forever. This presents marketers with 
the challenge of matching supply and demand. 
  You can remember these attributes using the mnemonic HIPI: 
heterogeneity, intangibility, perishability and inseparability. 
  Customers have always experienced services, but Pine and Gilmore 
suggest that the planned customer experience differs because management 
tries to engage the customer in a positive and memorable way. Using stage 
performance as their metaphor, they write:  ‘ the newly identiﬁ ed offering 
of experience occurs whenever a company intentionally uses services as 
the stage and goods as props to engage a (customer) ’ .
4   This distinction 
points us towards two perspectives of customer experience: normative 
and positive. 
●       Positive  customer experience describes customer experience as it 
is. It is a value free and objective statement of what it is like to be a 
customer.  
●       Normative  customer experience describes customer experience as 
management or customers believe it should be. It is a value-based 
judgement of what the experience ought to be for a customer.     
    The planned customer experience 
  As noted above, customers have always undergone an experience 
whenever service is performed. Customers experience viewing a movie, 
going to a supermarket, or undergoing a Government tax audit. They 
also experience goods as they are consumed or used: driving a car, 
wearing a suit or operating a ﬂ ight simulator. 
   Some customer experiences are commodity-like and purchased 
frequently; others are one-off experiences never to be experienced 
again. One experience of travelling to work on London Underground is 
much like another, but co-piloting a jet ﬁ ghter to celebrate an important 
birthday would be, for most of us, a unique experience. 
   Customer experience may be the core product that customers buy or 
a differentiating value-add. Some companies are now in the business 
of staging and selling customer experiences as a core product.  
5   You can 
buy experiences such as white water rafting, swimming with dolphins, 
feeding elephants, paragliding, bungee-jumping, driving a racing car, 
going on safari or climbing Sydney Harbour Bridge. Customers buy the 
experience: the bundle of cognitive and affective impressions that the 
purchase delivers (see Case 6.1).

===== PAGE 192 =====
 
Customer relationship management and customer experience 169
   However, many marketers try to add value to, and differentiate, 
their service by enhancing customer experience. You can see this when 
the variety of experiences in a service category differs substantially. 
Your experience on a charter ﬂ  ight differs from your experience on 
a scheduled ﬂ  ight; your experience at the Hard Rock Cafe differs from 
your experience at McCafé. 
  Sometimes these differentiated experiences are so singular that they 
become the embodiment of the brand. Branded customer experiences 
such as the Rainforest Café experience, the Dell online computer purchase 
experience or the IKEA shopping experience (Case 6.2) are all very distinct. 
   When companies plan customer experience they are attempting to 
inﬂ uence the cognitive and affective responses of customers by carefully 
designing the elements that inﬂ uence these responses.
       Case 6.1   
  The Kiwi Experience      
   The Kiwi Experience is a company that takes customers, mostly backpackers, on bus tours 
around New Zealand. Unlike most bus tours customers can join, leave and rejoin the tour 
whenever they want. Kiwi Experience customers aren’t buying a ticket from A to B; they 
buy an entire experience that incorporates accommodation, travel, entry to attractions, the 
company of other travellers and the leadership of the driver. Each customer’s experience has 
the potential to be unique, even among those travelling on the same tour. 
   Source: Kiwi Experience  6
       Case 6.2   
  The IKEA shopping experience      
   IKEA is a global home furnishings retailer with a distinctive blue and yellow livery. Most 
IKEA stores offer free parking. The in-store experience directs shoppers on a one way route 
through room setups that allow IKEA merchandise to be displayed as it would be in use. 
On arrival at a store entrance customers can pick up pencils, paper, tape measure, store 
layout guides, catalogues, shopping carts, shopping bags and baby strollers. Shoppers can 
try out merchandise without being bothered by IKEA salespeople. Price tags contain details 
including item name, colours, materials, and sizes. Shoppers note the items they want 
and either collect them from the self-serve area or have a staff member arrange for it to be 
available at the furniture pick-up point. Since most IKEA furniture is ﬂ  at packed, shoppers 
can take purchases home immediately, or IKEA will arrange home delivery. There are 
in-store restaurants. IKEA accepts cash, credit cards, debit cards and IKEA gift cards. IKEA 
offers a return and exchange solution to customers who are not fully satisﬁ  ed. The entire 
in-store experience is very carefully planned, and periodically reviewed and improved. 

===== PAGE 193 =====
 
170 Customer Relationship Management
    Customer experience concepts 
   There are a number of core concepts that are associated with customer 
experience management. These include touchpoint, moment of truth, 
and engagement. 
   Touchpoints are found wherever your customer comes into virtual or 
actual contact with your company’s products, services, communications, 
places, people, processes or technologies. 
  Touchpoints include websites, service centres, warehouses, contact 
centres, events, exhibitions, trade shows, seminars, Webinars, direct mail, 
e-mail, advertising, sales calls and retail stores. The variety and number 
of customer touchpoints varies across industries and between companies. 
The National Australia Bank, for example, has identiﬁ  ed nine customer 
touchpoints: branch, e-mail, website, ATM, ﬁ  nancial planner, Internet 
banking, personal banker, mobile mortgage specialist and customer 
contact centre. If you were undergoing hospital treatment your  ‘ customer ’  
experience would be made up of experiences at a number of touchpoints: 
during admission, in the ward, in the theatre, after surgery and during 
discharge. 
  An important challenge for managers is to ensure the customer’s 
experience is consistent across all touchpoints. For example, if a campaign 
manager mails out a customer offer, all the sales representatives must be 
informed of the offer before they call on a customer to discuss pricing. 
Similarly, if the customer calls the contact centre for assistance, the offer 
should be on display in the centre so the customer service agent can treat 
the customer correctly. 
   The expression  ‘ moment of truth ’  (MOT) was ﬁ  rst introduced by 
Richard Normann, and popularized by Jan Carlzon, former President of 
the airline SAS.  
7   Carlzon described a MOT as follows: 
  ‘ Last year, each of our ten million customers came in contact with 
approximately ﬁ  ve SAS employees, and this contact lasted an 
average of 15 seconds each time. Thus SAS is created 50 million 
times year, 15 seconds at a time. These 50 million  “ moments of 
truth ”  are the moments that ultimately determine whether SAS will 
succeed or fail as a business ’ .
   Extending the metaphor beyond the importance of people, Carlzon’s 
original focus, we can identify a MOT as any occasion the customer 
interacts with, or is exposed to, any organizational output which leads 
to the formation of an impression of the organization. Moments of 
truth occur during customer interactions at touchpoints. These are the 
moments when customers form evaluative judgements, positive or 
negative, about their experience. For example, when a customer calls 
a contact centre and interacts with an interactive voice response (IVR) 
robot, receives a visit from an account executive or enters a branch 
ofﬁ ce, these are moments of truth. If a service technician arrives late for 
an appointment, this negative moment of truth might taint the entire 
experience, even though the service task was well performed. Customers 
generally have expectations of what should happen during moments of 
truth, and if those expectations are not met, dissatisfaction will result. 

===== PAGE 194 =====
 
Customer relationship management and customer experience 171
   Engagement is a term that has become widely touted in the 
advertising industry in recent years. Agencies speak of engaging 
the consumer. Although there is no agreed deﬁ  nition of the term, in 
the present context, it can be thought of as the customer’s emotional and 
rational response to a customer experience. Creating highly engaged 
customers – with strong levels of emotional or rational connection to 
a brand, experience or organization – presents a greater challenge than 
creating satisﬁ ed customers. Traditional measures of satisfaction do not 
perform well as measures of engagement, so managers need to develop 
new metrics.  
8
  Companies that consciously design customer experience want to evoke 
strong, positive engagement. Such engagement might be expressed in a 
sense of conﬁ dence, integrity, pride, delight or passion.  9   Companies do 
this by carefully designing what happens during moments of truth at 
customer touchpoints. Customer experience can become stale over time, 
and stale experiences are not engaging. Repeat business from customers at 
Planet Hollywood and Rainforest Café is low for this reason. It is therefore 
necessary to constantly refresh the customer experience, provoking 
customer surprise by doing the unexpected. 
    How to understand customer experience 
  In order to improve customer experience, ﬁ rst it is necessary to understand 
it. Companies can use a number of methods for improving their insight 
into customer experience: mystery shopping, experience mapping, process 
mapping, plotting the customer activity cycle, performing ethnographies, 
and conducting participant and non-participant observation. 
    Mystery shopping 
  Mystery shopping involves the recruitment of paid shoppers to report 
on their customer experience with the company sponsoring the research. 
They might also perform a comparative shop during which they compare 
the sponsor’s performance with competitors. A number of market research 
companies offer mystery shopping services. Mystery shopping is widely 
used in B2C environments such as retailing, banks, service stations, bars, 
restaurants and hotels. It is sometimes used in B2B environments. For 
example, an insurance company might use mystery shopping to assess the 
performance of its broker network. 
    Experience mapping 
   Experience mapping is a process that strives to understand, chart and 
improve what happens at customer touchpoints. Focus groups, face-to-
face interviews or telephone interviews are conducted with a sample of 
customers who describe their experience at these touchpoints. The focus 
is on two important questions. What is the experience like? How can it 
be improved? The objective is to identify the gaps between actual and 
desired experience. Then the company can begin to focus on strategies to 
close the gaps. These strategies typically involve improvements to people 

===== PAGE 195 =====
 
172 Customer Relationship Management
and processes. Outcomes might be better training and reward schemes 
for people, or investment in IT to support process improvements.  Figure 
6.2    illustrates a hotel guest’s experience map. 
Request
reservation
details
Make
reservation Arrive at hotel Stay in hotel Leave hotel
Park car Bags to room
Swipe cardGreeting Hand over
key Thank you
What does the customer want to happen?
What should the receptionist do (process)?
What skills, knowledge, attitudes are needed (people)?
What technological support is required (IT)?
Register
Check-in
 Figure 6.2       
 Experience map of a 
hotel guest    
   The map shows that the customer’s experience occurs over four time 
periods. ‘ Arrival at hotel ’  is decomposed into three secondary episodes: 
parking the car, checking-in and taking bags to the room. The check-in 
episode is again decomposed, this time into six main components. It is at 
this level that the customer experiences the hotel’s people and processes. 
This is where opportunities for improving people and processes can 
focus. Every customer experience can be decomposed and redesigned 
in this way. However, not all customer encounters contribute equally 
to the overall assessment of experience. For example, hospital patients 
are often prepared to tolerate food quality to a standard that would be 
utterly unacceptable because they need a surgical procedure. Companies 
are well advised to focus on the critical episodes and encounters that 
make up customer experience.  
    Process mapping 
   Process mapping is a form of blueprinting, a technique popularized by 
G. Lyn Shostack. 10   Blueprints are graphical representations of business 
processes. They are useful not only for developing ways to improve 
customer experience, but also for improving back-ofﬁ  ce internal 
customer–supplier relationships, setting service standards, identifying 
fail-points, training new people, and eliminating process redundancy 
and duplication.  

===== PAGE 196 =====
 
Customer relationship management and customer experience 173
    The customer activity cycle (CAC) 
   The customer activity cycle (CAC) aims to depict the processes that 
customers go through in making and reviewing buying decisions. 11
Sandra Vandermerwe broke the process into three main stages: 
    1.     deciding what to do 
    2.     implementing the decision 
    3.     reviewing what was done. 
   Sometimes, this process might be of very short duration but other times 
might last years. Consider at one extreme a ten-minute coffee break, and 
at the other, a multi-year relationship with a credit card vendor. 
   The CAC enables companies to break down a complex process into 
more basic elements and to collect data on the customer’s experience at 
each point in the cycle. Then companies can look for ways to improve 
the experience. Figure 6.3    depicts the relationship between Citibank 
and a customer whose needs are changing as it begins to transact across 
borders. The basic CAC is shown as comprising four stages: opening a 
bank account, using banking facilities, expanding banking needs across 
borders and updating banking needs. The italicized box content shows 
what Citibank was able to do to improve the experience of the customer 
at each of these four stages.  
1. One step on line
 opening.
2. Instant Citicard
 master
 documentation
 (one-time)
Customer
Activity Cycle
(CAC)
Doing itKeeping it going
Deciding
what to do
Pre
DuringPost
Update banking
needs
Use banking
facilities
1. Integrated products
2. Individual pricing
3. One step access
 ATMs (citibank
 banking centers)
4. Bank Visa card
5. Telephone banking
1. Standard branches
2. Global access
3. Global Citicard
4. Integrated
IT information
1. Consulting
 and advice
2. Relationship
 management 
Expand banking
needs
cross-border
Open bank
account
 Figure 6.3 
      Citibank’s 
understanding
of the customer 
activity cycle    
    Ethnographic methods 
  Ethnographic methods can be used to gain a better understanding of 
the socio-cultural context of customer experience. Martyn Hammersley 
characterizes ethnography as participation, either overt or covert, in 
people’s daily lives over a prolonged period of time, watching what 

===== PAGE 197 =====
 
174 Customer Relationship Management
happens, listening to what is said and asking questions.  12   Ethnography 
is a naturalistic form of investigation that reveals customer experience as 
it occurs in everyday life. Even mundane goods can be experienced in 
emotionally-charged ways. Eric Arnould, for example, shows how a table 
can be much more than just a piece of furniture.  ‘ (T)he table has become 
the “ heart of the home ”  where meals, crafts, and study occur under 
mother’s watchful eye ’ .
13   It has been well established that customers 
appropriate the values of upmarket brands such as Rolex or Chanel when 
they consume, but Jennifer Coupland’s ethnography also shows how 
low-involvement, ‘ invisible ’ , everyday products can serve an important 
social purpose, allowing families to create meanings that transcend the 
values that are associated with the brand name. She notes how families 
 ‘ strive to erase brands  …  and create their own product value as if the 
brand never existed in the ﬁ rst place. Brands get in the way ’ .
14
    Participant observation 
  Companies can develop a better understanding of customer experience 
by participating in the customer experience at various touchpoints. Some 
companies require their senior management to learn about customer 
experience by providing front line customer service. This ensures that 
executives who are several hierarchical levels removed from customers 
understand what it is like to be a customer. For example, McDonald’s 
periodically requires its senior managers to work as staff members in 
restaurants. 
    Non-participant observation 
   In preference to participant observation, other companies require 
their senior managers to observe customer interactions at customer 
touchpoints. This is particularly suitable when the primary customer 
touchpoint is a call centre or contact centre. Managers can listen in to 
customer calls to acquire a better understanding of customer experience, 
but not actually make or receive calls.  
15
    Experiential marketing 
strategies and tactics 
   Managers wanting to improve customer experience will need answers to 
a number of questions, such as: 
    1.     What sort of outcomes do our customers want to experience?  
    2.     What is the current customer experience? 
    3.     What tools and strategies are available to close any gap between 
current and desired experience?  
    4.     How can we measure whether we have succeeded? 
  Len Berry writes that it is critical for companies to manage the experience 
clues which customers are exposed to or interact with.  ‘ Anything that can 

===== PAGE 198 =====
 
Customer relationship management and customer experience 175
be perceived or sensed – or recognized by its absence – is an experience 
clue ’ .16   Bernd Schmitt identiﬁ es a number of experience clues that can 
be composed by customer management, whether in sales, marketing or 
service, to inﬂ uence experiential outcomes. They include: communications, 
visual identity, product presence, co-branding, spatial environments, 
websites and electronic media, and people. 
17
    Communications 
   Communications include company-generated messaging such as 
advertising, brochures, newsletters and annual reports. Increasingly, 
companies are also enabling customers to generate their own product 
or service-related messaging through user groups, chat sites and blogs. 
Much advertising, it must be said, is barely noticeable, and it takes an 
exceptional campaign to evoke a strong emotional response by rising 
above the noise generated by thousands of humdrum advertisements. 
You’ll no doubt have your own short list of ads that evoke strong 
emotions.
    Visual identity 
   Visual identity is communicated through brand names, logos and 
livery. BP , formerly British Petroleum, has been repositioning itself as a 
broadbased energy company rather than an oil reﬁ  ner. BPs ﬂ  ower logo 
has helped in that repositioning, with the company name now signifying 
Beyond Petroleum. 
   Consumer brand names such as Jolt, a high caffeine and sugar cola, 
and business brands such as Accenture, have strong experiential value.  
    Product presence 
   Product presence comprises a number of product-related variables, 
such as product design, packaging, display, brand characteristics and 
point-of-sale. Innovative design can evoke strong emotional responses. 
James Dyson’s dual cyclone vacuum cleaner completely revitalized the 
moribund vacuum cleaner market that had suffered the same low-tech 
industrial design values for the previous 80 years. Dyson’s innovation 
excited the retail market, who found the new designs sexy, and 
consumers ditched their Hoovers and Electroluxes to buy Dyson’s DC01 
model at prices signiﬁ cantly above market norms. 
   Given that a large number of consumer brand choices are made at the 
supermarket shelf, packaging is very important, having only fractions 
of seconds to capture the attention and evoke a response from shoppers. 
 Figure 6.4    shows an Australian packaging design innovation award 
winner: a supermarket package for a NESCAFÉ coffee line extension. The 
award citation read: 
  ‘ This design expresses the very essence of  “ short black ” : neat, dark, 
concise. Here is a pack that is the personiﬁ cation of its promise. No-
nonsense, pure, and pared back to basics: this is the essence of good 

===== PAGE 199 =====
 
176 Customer Relationship Management
design. This diminutive jar has great  “ feel ”  in the hand, in fact it is 
very hard to resist picking it up ’ .
   Brand characters such as Ronald McDonald (fast service food retail), 
Johnnie Walker (Scotch whisky) or Bertie Bassett (liquorice allsorts), can 
become important brand icons in their own right, which customers can 
become ﬁ ercely protective about when brand owners threaten change.  
    Co-branding 
   Co-branding includes a number of activities such as event marketing, 
sponsorship, alliances, partnerships, licensing, product placement, and 
cooperative campaigns of all kinds. Many companies have been associated 
with the fervour emanating from the Super Bowl, FIFA World Cup and 
the Olympics. Coca Cola knows the signiﬁ  cance of event marketing, and 
has agreed to extend its sponsorship of the Olympics by remaining the 
 ‘ Ofﬁ cial Soft Drink ’  of the games until 2020. Ambush marketers attempt to 
capitalize on the audience size and event signiﬁ cance by feigning an  ‘ ofﬁ cial 
association ’  with events. This is often done in a jocular way, but ofﬁ  cial 
sponsors regard this as an infringement of their rights. Anheuser-Busch 
paid over US $ 50 million to become ofﬁ  cial sponsor of the 2002 Winter 
Olympics in Salt Lake City. The sponsorship agreement gave the brewery 
the rights to use the word Olympic and the ﬁ  ve-ring logo. Schirf Brewery, 
a small local company, came up with an ambush marketing strategy. They 
marked their delivery trucks with  ‘ Wasutch Beers. The Unofﬁ cial Beer. 2002 
Winter Games ’ . Schirf technically didn’t breach the sponsors ’  rights because 
 Figure 6.4  
      Packaging that 
evokes emotional 
response
18    

===== PAGE 200 =====
 
Customer relationship management and customer experience 177
they used neither the word Olympics nor the logo. Product placement in TV 
shows, movies, books and video games has become part of the marketer’s 
armoury. There is little doubt that much of Aston Martin’s brand cachet 
is linked to the James Bond movie franchise. There is a strong association 
between the brand and the context of its seen consumption. The ‘ Men in 
Black ’  movies have featured product placement for Ray-Ban, Mercedes 
Benz, Sprint and Burger King.  
    Spatial environments 
  Areas such as retail stores, ofﬁ ce spaces, lobbies, car parks, buildings, 
gardens and public spaces can evoke strong cognitive and emotional 
responses. People in these spaces can be exposed a number of stimuli 
including noise, temperature, odour, colour, vibration, air characteristics 
(quality, movement, pressure, humidity), other people, architectural 
design, trafﬁ c, spatial arrangements, building size, space, complexity, 
signage and information load. Environmental psychologists study the 
impact of spatial environments on human behaviour. Albert Mehrabian 
and James Russell argued that all emotional responses to environmental 
stimuli could be reduced to three basic dimensions, pleasure, 
arousal and dominance, which, when moderated by the individual’s 
personality is expressed as approach or avoidance behaviour towards 
the environment.  
19   Environments that offer too little or too much 
arousal are unpleasant for most people and promote avoidance 
behaviours. Environments in which people feel they lack control are 
unattractive. Architects, interior designers and landscapers can construct 
environments that promote desired emotional or cognitive outcomes. 
Traditional bank branches feature classical architectural styles, oversized 
and heavy doors, solid timber furnishings, all carefully constructed to 
promote a sense of ﬁ nancial probity and conservatism.  
    Websites and electronic media 
   Websites and electronic media offer enormous opportunities to create 
customer experiences that are compelling. The use of sound, animation, 
audio and video clips, chat rooms, blogs, RSS feeds, and the capacity 
for site visitors to customize their own pages offers rich potential for 
emotional engagement. Figure 6.5    shows that online visitors are able to 
discriminate between good and bad experiences.  
    People 
  In many service contexts, people are absolutely critical. They can be the 
service (counsellor), produce the service (chef), sell the service (account 
manager), and represent tangible evidence of the service (consultant). 
The performance of people can evoke strong approach and avoidance 
behaviours in customers. Pushy salespeople may make one-off sales, but 
they don’t build long-term relationships. Customers can become very 
attached to particular service providers. The signiﬁ  cance of people to 
customer experience is recognized in the service–proﬁ t chain. This theory 

===== PAGE 201 =====
 
178 Customer Relationship Management
1. Best Buy
2. Target
3. Nordstrom
4. JC penney
5. Costco
TOP 5 BEST-LIKED
E-TAILERS IN TERMS OF
CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE:
1. Amazon.com
2. Barnes and Noble
3. Circuit city
4. eBay
5. Lands’ end
5 E-TAILERS WITH LOWEST
SCORES IN TERMS OF
CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE:
 Figure 6.5 
      Online customer 
experience
20    
proposes that happy employees make happy customers make happy 
shareholders. Research conducted in the USA indicates a clear connection 
between employee experience, customer experience and business results.  21
    Customer experience and 
the role of CRM 
   The implementation of a CRM strategy, and the deployment of CRM 
technologies, can have a signiﬁ  cant impact on customer experience. 
Strategic CRMs goal of winning and keeping proﬁ  table customers 
through a customer-centric organizational culture implies that there will 
be a dedicated focus on meeting the requirements of deﬁ  ned customer 
groups. Customer experience should therefore satisfy targeted customer 
expectations, while other potential customers or market segments 
may not be served. The principles of customer portfolio management, 
discussed in Chapter 5, suggest that companies will offer different 
value propositions and service levels to different clusters of customers. 
There will therefore be differentiated customer experiences across the 
portfolio.
   Operational CRM involves the application of technology in the 
customer-facing functions of sales, marketing and service. CRM 
practitioners want and expect CRM to inﬂ uence customer experience in a 
number of positive ways: customers will be recognized, their needs better 
understood, order fulﬁ  lment will be more accurate, communications 
will be more relevant and timely, and service will be more responsive 
and reliable. However, CRM technology implementations are often 
motivated by efﬁ  ciency motives. For example, the implementation of 
interactive voice response (IVR) technologies in call centres has allowed 

===== PAGE 202 =====
 
Customer relationship management and customer experience 179
routine customer interactions to be automated, reducing transaction 
costs by up to 60 per cent, and downsizing the number of service agents 
to those required for more complex calls. Customer response to IVR 
implementation is not always positive, particularly in more conservative 
segments of the customer base. That said, customers may not even 
be aware of several improvements that IVR can bring to customer 
experience: more accurate information (less human error), 24–7 access to 
information and enhanced data security and privacy. 
  Analytical CRM is the intelligent mining of customer-related 
data for strategic or tactical purposes. When analytical CRM works 
well, customers receive timely, relevant communications and offers. 
CRM practitioners are able to predict propensities to buy and detect 
opportune times to make offers, therefore ensuring that customers are 
not burdened with irrelevant communications. Analytical CRM can also 
be used to help customers in unexpected ways. Bank customers can be 
alerted when approaching a credit limit, thereby avoiding unwelcome 
fees, or telco customers can be migrated to a more suitable telephone 
contract, thereby reducing their operating costs. The CEO of CRM 
technology vendor RightNow Technologies uses a mining metaphor 
to describe how analytical CRM has been deployed historically.  
22   He 
suggests that sales-focused CRM implementations have conventionally 
been used to strip-mine customers, rather than understand and meet 
their needs better. Strip-mining has compromised any efforts to deliver 
excellent customer experience. Rather than strip-mining, he suggests 
that it makes better sense to nurture customers as if they were renewable 
resources.  
    Features of CRM software 
applications that inﬂ uence 
customer experience 
  CRM software applications that are difﬁ  cult to navigate or conﬁ  gure 
or that are slow to respond leave the customer painfully aware of the 
limitations of a company’s customer management expertise. Furthermore, 
once a CRM application is published on the web for customers and 
channel partners to use, performance and usability issues are experienced 
ﬁ rst-hand. Usability, performance, ﬂ  exibility and scalability are key 
features of CRM solutions that deliver a favourable customer experience. 
23
    Usability 
   Usability refers to the ease with which a CRM application can be 
navigated or used. High usability applications are intuitive and require 
very little effort to perform the required task, whether that is updating 
customer contact details, making an offer, or resolving a complaint. 
High usability applications require minimal user training prior to or at 

===== PAGE 203 =====
 
180 Customer Relationship Management
deployment, and are experienced as highly responsive by the customer. 
A highly responsive application is a necessary ingredient in delivering 
a highly responsive experience for the customer. 
  Older-style CRM applications traditionally used menu systems and 
function keys for navigation. Function keys can be very fast to use. 
However, they can only take the user through a ﬂ  ow that was originally 
conceived during system design. These approaches can be cumbersome in 
the front ofﬁ ce and take time to arrive at the customer’s desired outcome. 
Web technologies, on the other hand, incorporate hyperlinks and drill 
downs that support an intuitive,  ‘ go where the customer wants ’  approach. 
If you want more information on something, you can click on the link. 
For this reason, a web-style interface has become the norm for CRM 
applications. 
   The only caveat to this is in the call centre, where high volumes of calls 
are handled in a largely predictable manner. In these situations, basic 
web-style technologies are not adequate and must be augmented by 
scripting or applets in order to deliver the required level of interactivity 
and performance.  
    Flexibility 
   Responsiveness can be  ‘ hard wired ’  by pre-empting all of the processes 
that a customer may require and implementing these in the application 
in advance. The difﬁ  culty with this approach is that customers don’t 
always follow the systems engineer’s or workﬂ  ow designer’s script. 
An application’s ﬂ  exibility determines how many alternatives are 
available to the user at any given time; these alternatives are often 
implemented through hyperlinks, buttons or screen tabs. A highly 
ﬂ exible application will have many such links, and will not require 
speciﬁ c processes to be followed. The customer does not want to be 
told by a call centre customer service representative  ‘ I’m sorry, but I 
can’t do A until I do B ’ .  
    High performance 
   The performance of a CRM system is often determined by its weakest 
link. All technologies must be aligned in order to create a high 
performance system. A CRM application running on an extremely fast 
network will still be slow if the database is overloaded. Even the best 
software application will be unresponsive if network performance, 
database performance or server performance are substandard. Most 
CRM applications separate the application server from the database 
server in order to improve performance. 
   Performance is also determined by integration and synchronization 
technologies. A CRM application will appear slow if the user has to wait 
for an automatic e-mail to be created and sent via the e-mail interface. 
Remote users will perceive the system as slow if they have to wait more 
than a few minutes for their daily synchronization to their laptop. The 
speed of these processes can have a dramatic effect on system acceptance 
and uptake. 

===== PAGE 204 =====
 
Customer relationship management and customer experience 181
  An important characteristic of a high performing CRM system 
architecture is not only this ability to separate high load areas, such as 
the database and application servers, but also the ability to expand the 
application and web server tier by adding more servers as required. This 
is shown in the  Figure 6.6   .
    Scalability 
  As the CRM system grows and is used by more internal and external 
people, the scalability of the system becomes important. Acceptable 
performance with 100 call centre users may become unacceptable 
once the customers are online and hitting the website, or ﬁ  eld sales 
representatives start synchronizing across all territories at the same 
time. CRM applications should be evaluated based on proven numbers 
and types of users (concurrent on the web, synchronization, full load 
call centre, etc.) in order to assess their ability to scale. A system that 
is unable to scale will deliver inadequate customer experience as user 
numbers grow. 
  Finally, it should be recognized that high performance CRM systems 
require investment to keep up with changing customer expectations. It is 
most important that the CRM application be constantly monitored against 
predeﬁ ned performance targets to ensure performance remains acceptable. 
This is particularly the case in high turnaround areas where the customer 
is involved, such as the call centre and website, and where high loads take 
Web
(customer, partner) Telemarketing
Service
(syncronized)
Sales
(wireless or sync)
Local
DB
CRM Application and web servers
Web server 1 Web server 2 App server 1 App server 2
CRM transactional
database
CRM Analytics
database
CRM
metadata
Back office systems
 Figure 6.6 
      Typical CRM 
architecture,
showing web, back-
ofﬁ ce integration 
and mobile. Note 
the database tier 
(bottom), the 
application server 
tier (middle) and 
the user interface 
tier (top)    

===== PAGE 205 =====
 
182 Customer Relationship Management
place at the same time, such as the afternoon synchronization run or back-
ofﬁ ce integration run. 
    Researching the link 
between customer 
experience and CRM 
   There is very little research evidence of how CRM has inﬂ  uenced 
customer experience. The Meta Group reports that: 
  ‘ business customers want to be identiﬁ  ed for their appropriate 
requirements (e.g. resupply of goods and services that they already 
purchase), so that they can save time. Many consumers fall into a 
similar camp. But in exchange for being identiﬁ  ed (e.g. providing 
information about themselves or having it collected), customers/
consumers expect to be treated as  “ special ” . This means free products, 
better service, useful information, etc. They also do not want to be 
bothered by endless phone calls or e-mails to sell them more  “ stuff ”   ‘ .  
24
   These comments do indicate that customer experience, following a 
CRM implementation, is not necessarily positive. Customers who are 
accustomed to receiving face-to-face calls from sales representatives 
might ﬁ nd they are expected to place orders and pay through a sales 
portal. Resistance, resentment and churn may result. Weary workers 
arriving home after a hard day’s labour are confronted with cold calls 
selling products that aren’t of the slightest interest. The avoidance of 
negative customer experience from ineptly implemented CRM is an 
important reason for ensuring the voice of the customer is heard during 
CRM project planning and implementation. It also signals the importance 
of monitoring customer response after a CRM implementation. 
  Despite these cautions, technology can fundamentally change customer 
experience for the better, because it reinvents what happens at customer 
touchpoints. Imagine a sales representative who has always carried hard 
copy brochures. Some are dog-eared; some are not current; some are 
missing. He is sitting in front of a qualiﬁ ed prospect with a product-related 
query who is ready to buy. The representative goes to his briefcase. The 
brochure is missing, and he cannot answer the query.  ‘ I’ll get back to you ’ , 
he says. But he doesn’t. He forgets and the opportunity is lost. Equipped 
with CRM, the interaction is very different. The representative carries 
a laptop with a current, searchable, product database. He answers the 
query successfully. The prospect asks for a ﬁ rm quote. The representative 
activates the quotation engine. A quote is prepared and discussed. The 
representative requests the order. He wins the order. The order is entered 
into the laptop. The representative shares the screen information with the 
customer. An electronic signature is obtained. Order conﬁ rmation is sent 
to the buyer’s e-mail address. That night the representative keys in his call 

===== PAGE 206 =====
 
Customer relationship management and customer experience 183
report, synchronizes his laptop with the company’s main computer, and 
the order fulﬁ lment process begins.
        Summary      
   In this chapter you’ve read about the links between CRM and customer experience. We 
deﬁ ned customer experience as the cognitive and affective outcome of the customer’s 
exposure to, or interaction with, a company’s people, processes, technologies, products, 
services and other outputs. Customer experience is important because it inﬂ  uences 
future buying behaviour and word-of-mouth. Although customers have always had 
experiences in the purchase and consumption of goods and services, we have recently 
seen the emergence of the experience economy, in which companies have brought 
to market experiences such as open garden weekends, team-building exercises 
and canyoning. Three key concepts capture the essence of customer experience 
management: touchpoint, moment of truth and engagement. Customers are exposed 
to, or interact with, companies ’ people, processes and technologies at touchpoints such 
as call centres, shop fronts or automated kiosks. Some of these exposures or interactions 
are more signiﬁ  cant than others, and become moments of truth that are important 
in the delivery of customer experience. Managers are keen to promote rational and 
emotional engagement with the company, brand or offer by delivering experiences 
that meet or exceed customer expectations. In order to improve customer experience 
it is important to understand current customer experience. A number of techniques are 
available to management for this purpose, including experience mapping, ethnographic 
research and participant observation. Having determined what the experience should 
be like, a number of tools and techniques can be deployed, including communications, 
visual identity, product presence, co-branding, spatial environments, websites and 
electronic media, and people. CRM practitioners want technology implementations to 
inﬂ uence customer experience in a number of positive ways, such as more relevant and 
timely communications, and more responsive and reliable service, but customers do not 
always respond positively to change. Features of CRM solutions that inﬂ  uence customer 
experience include usability, ﬂ exibility, high performance and scalability.       
  References  
       1.          Shaw ,    C.   and   Ivens ,    J.             ( 2002 )        Building great customer experiences             .  
 Basingstoke, UK :       Palgrave Macmillan              . 
       2.          Petre ,    M.  ,   Minocha ,    S.   and   Roberts ,    D.                ( 2006 )        Usability beyond the 
website: an empirically grounded e-commerce evaluation instrument 
for the total customer experience .             Behaviour and Information Technology       ,  
 Vol. 25      ( 2 )       , pp.  189  –       203        . 
       3.          Pine ,    B.H.   and   Gilmore ,    J.H.                ( 1998 )        Welcome to the experience 
economy .             Harvard Business Review       ,   July–August         , pp.  97  –       105        . 

===== PAGE 207 =====
 
184 Customer Relationship Management
       4.          Pine ,    J.B.   II and   Gilmore ,    J.             ( 1999 )        The experience economy             .  Boston, MA :
      Harvard Business School Press              . 
       5.         See for example  http://www.redballoondays.com.au/ 
       6.          http://www.kiwiexperience.com/ . Accessed 20 January 2008. 
       7.          Normann ,    R.             ( 2002 )        Service management: strategy and leadership in service 
business         ,  3rd edn.        New York :       John Wiley              . 
       8.         For more information refer to Bowden, J. (2007) The process of 
customer engagement: an examination of segment speciﬁ c differences. 
Proceedings of the Academy of Marketing Conference, Kingston 
Business School, Egham, Surrey, July, CD-ROM. 
       9.          McEwen ,    W.                ( 2004 )        Why satisfaction isn’t satisfying .             Gallup 
Management Journal Online       ,  November         , pp.  1  –       4        . 
      10.          Shostack ,    G.L.                ( 1987 )        Service positioning through structural change .
Journal of Marketing       , Vol.  51         , pp.  34  –       43        . 
      11.          Vandermerwe ,    S.                ( 1993 )        Jumping into the customer activity cycle: a 
new role for customer services in the 1990s .  Columbia Journal of World 
Business       , Vol.  28      ( 2 )       , Summer, pp.  46  –       66            . 
      12.          Hammersley ,    M.   and   Ackersley ,    P .             ( 1995 )        Ethnography: principles in 
practice         ,  2nd edn.        London :       Routledge              . 
      13.          Arnould ,    E.   and   Proce ,    L.                ( 2006 )        Market-oriented ethnography 
revisited .            Journal of Advertising Research       ,  September         , pp.  251  –       262        . 
      14.          Coupland ,    J.C.                ( 2005 )        Invisible brands: an ethnography of households 
and the brands in their kitchen pantries .             Journal of Consumer Research       ,  
 Vol. 32         , pp.  106  –       118        . 
      15.         For an analysis of the listening tools that companies are using see 
McGuire, S., Koh, S.C.L. and Huang, C. (2007) Identifying the range 
of customer listening tools: a logical precursor to CRM?  Industrial 
Management and Data Systems , Vol. 107(4), pp. 567–586. 
      16.          Berry ,    L.L.  ,   Carbone ,    L.P .   and   Haeckel ,    S.H.                ( 2002 )        Managing the total 
customer experience .             Sloan Management Review       ,  Spring         , pp.  85  –       89        . 
      17.          Schmitt ,    B.             ( 1999 )        Experiential marketing             .  New York :       Free Press              . 
      18.         Image reprinted with the permission of Société des Produits Nestlé 
S.A., Vevey, Switzerland – trademark and design owners. 
      19.          Mehrabian ,    A.   and   Russell ,    J.A.             ( 1974 )        An approach to environmental 
psychology            .  Cambridge, MA :       MIT Press              . 
    20.      Courtesy of Vividence Corporation.  http://www.vividence.com .      2004.      
      21.          Heskett ,    J.L.  ,   Sasser ,   W.E.   and   Schlesinger ,    L.A.             ( 1997 )        The service–proﬁ t 
chain            .  New York :       Free Press              . 
      22.          http://www.mycustomer.com/cgi-bin/item.cgi?id /H11005     132411 . Accessed 
27 September 2007. 
      23.         This section is based on John Turnbull’s contribution of Chapter 3 to 
Buttle, F. (2004).  Customer Relationship Management: Concepts and Tools . 
Oxford: Elsevier. 
      24.          http://www.ctiforum.com/technology/CRM/wp01/download/
meta_tocrm.pdf . Accessed 28 September 2007. 

===== PAGE 208 =====
 
                            Creating value for 
customers
 Chapter 7 

===== PAGE 209 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 210 =====
 
           Chapter objectives      
   By the end of this chapter, you will understand: 
    1.   the meaning of the term  ‘ value ’   
    2.   how customers weigh up  ‘ beneﬁ ts ’  and  ‘ sacriﬁ ces ’  in the value equation  
    3.   three major forms of value delivery strategy adopted by successful companies  
    4.   what is meant by the term  ‘ value proposition ’   
    5.   how marketers create customer value by mixing together a number of variables 
known as the 7Ps.  
    6.   the importance of customization in creating value  
    7.   how the Internet is changing the way that customers receive value from 
communication and distribution.         
    Introduction 
   In this chapter you will learn about how companies create and deliver 
value to customers. You’ll ﬁ nd out what customers mean when they talk 
about value, and the various elements that make up a company’s value 
proposition. 
   Our deﬁ nition of CRM, repeated below, stresses the centrality of value 
creation and delivery: 
   CRM is the core business strategy that integrates internal processes 
and functions and external networks to create and deliver value 
to targeted customers at a proﬁ  t . It is grounded on high-quality 
customer-related data and enabled by information technology. 
   Of the various forms of CRM that we have discussed, the task of 
directing the creation and delivery of value to targeted customers at a 
proﬁ t falls to strategic CRM.  
    Understanding value 
  Although the term  ‘ value ’  is used in a number of different ways,  1   in a 
CRM sense it can be thought of as follows: 
 Value is the customer’s perception of the balance between beneﬁ  ts 
received from a product or service and the sacriﬁ  ces made to 
experience those beneﬁ ts.   
   It is possible to represent this deﬁ nition in the form of an equation: 
Value Benefits
Sacrifices/H11005
      

===== PAGE 211 =====
 
188 Customer Relationship Management
   The equation shows that you can increase the customer’s perceived 
value in two main ways: increase the beneﬁ  ts they experience, or 
decrease the sacriﬁ ces they make. 
   Let’s look at sacriﬁ ces. Customers make several types of sacriﬁ ce. 
●       Money : the price of the product or service, which may or may not 
be the listed price. There may be additional costs such as credit card 
surcharges, interest charges on extended payments or warranty costs. 
There may be discounts applied for relationship customers, early 
payment or volume purchases.  
●       Search costs  : the purchasing process may include exhaustive pre-
purchase work in searching for solutions and comparing alternatives. 
This can take considerable time. In a B2B context, a purchaser’s time 
may have a real monetary cost. When purchasing involves several 
people these costs may be very high indeed. This is one of the reasons 
that customers are motivated to remain with existing suppliers and 
solutions. There may also be travel and accommodation costs as 
buyers visit reference customers to see solutions onsite. Transaction 
costs are normally lower when search costs are eliminated and 
purchasing processes are routinized. Some suppliers are prepared to 
take on the costs of managing inventory for important customers, so 
that they are less tempted to search for alternative solutions. Known as 
vendor managed inventory (VMI), it reduces search and reorder costs 
for customers. 
●       Psychic costs  : purchasing can be a very stressful and frustrating 
experience. For some customers, holiday shopping at Christmas and 
other festivals means struggling to come up with gift ideas for relatives 
they rarely see, travelling on crowded public transport, pushing 
through throngs of shoppers, dealing with temporary sales staff who 
don’t have enough product knowledge, paying inﬂ ated prices, carrying 
home arms full of heavy packages, and doing all these in bad weather! 
Psychic costs can be so great for some customers that they postpone 
purchases until a better time. Others cancel purchasing completely. 
     Perceived risk is also a consideration in assessing psychic cost. 
Perceived risk takes a variety of forms: performance, physical, ﬁ nancial, 
social and psychological. Performance risk occurs when the customer is 
not fully sure that the product will do what is required. Physical risk 
is when the customer feels that there may be some bodily harm done 
by the product. Financial risk is felt when there is danger of economic 
loss from the purchase. Social risk is felt when customers feel that their 
social standing or reputation is at risk. Psychological risk is felt when 
the customer’s self-esteem or self-image is endangered by an act of 
purchase or consumption. When perceived risk is high, psychic cost is 
correspondingly high. 
     Customers often feel uncomfortable at higher levels of perceived 
risk and may try to reduce risk in a number of ways, as indicated in 
 Figure 7.1   . When customers try to reduce perceived risk, they are in 
effect trying to reduce the denominator of the value equation, thereby 
improving value. Suppliers can help customers reduce their levels of 
perceived risk in a number of ways. For example, performance risk is 

===== PAGE 212 =====
 
Creating value for customers 189
reduced by performance guarantees; ﬁ nancial risk is reduced by ﬁ  rm 
prices and interest-free payment plans. 
Delay purchase
Seek word-of-mouth endorsement
Negotiate service contracts
Seek additional information from advertising copy
Buy known brands
Deal with reputable suppliers
Seek performance guarantees
Buy with credit card (protection if product fails)
Negotiate discounts
Take out insurance
Demand pre-purchase trial  Figure 7.1 
      How do customers 
reduce perceived 
risk?    
   Clearly there is more to the sacriﬁ ce component of the value equation 
than money alone. This explains why customers buy what appear to 
be suboptimal solutions to their problems. Why would a customer buy 
a printer for $300 when an identically speciﬁ  ed machine is available 
for $100? Perhaps the answer lies in search and psychic costs. There is 
more to the beneﬁ  t component than quality alone, although Bradley 
Gale has developed a value-based customer choice model that uses 
customer-perceived quality as the numerator and monetary price as 
the denominator. This assumes that customers will prefer the offer that 
delivers the best value ratio of quality against price.  
2
    Total cost of ownership 
   There is a trend towards considering costs from the perspective of 
 ‘ total cost of ownership ’  or TCO. TCO looks not only at the costs of 
acquiring products, but also at the full costs of using, and servicing the 
product throughout its life, and ultimately disposing of the product. 
What is thought of as  ‘ consumption ’  can be broken down into a 
number of activities or stages, including search, purchase, ownership, 
use, consumption and disposal. TCO is an attempt to come up with 
meaningful estimates of lifetime costs across all these stages. 
  When customers take a TCO view of purchasing, suppliers can respond 
through a form of pricing called economic value to the customer (EVC). 
In a B2B context, EVC works by proving to customers that the value 
proposition being presented improves the proﬁ  tability of the customer, 
by increasing sales, reducing costs or otherwise improving productivity. 
EVC computes for customers the value that the solution will deliver over 
the lifetime of ownership and use. Suppliers can apply EVC thinking to 
each stage of the ‘ consumption ’  process described above. For example, 

===== PAGE 213 =====
 
190 Customer Relationship Management
a computer supplier may agree to provide free service and to collect and 
dispose of unwanted machines after four years. Customers performing 
these tasks themselves would incur tangible costs. This is therefore the 
value that these activities have for customers. 
   EVC encourages suppliers to customize price for customers on the 
basis of their particular value requirements. 
   Customer value researchers have developed several typologies of 
customer-perceived value. Jag Sheth and colleagues have identiﬁ  ed ﬁ ve 
types of value: functional, social, emotional, epistemic and conditional 
value.
3   In a B2B context, a distinction is made between economic value 
(satisfying economic needs at low transaction costs) and social value 
(satisfaction with the relationship with the supplier).  4
    How companies compete to create value 
for customers 
   Companies compete in a number of different ways, as indicated in 
 Figure 7.2   .  5   In a well-regulated economy, most companies compete 
by trying to deliver consistently better value than competitors. This 
means understanding customers ’  requirements fully and creating and 
delivering better solutions than competitors. 
Conflict
Destroy the competition, e.g. BA v Laker Airways
Competition
Perform better than competitors at meeting customer requirements, e.g.
Procter & Gamble v Unilever
Co-existence
Allow other companies to operate in their own niche, providing they don’t enter your 
market, e.g. Cross® v Bic
Co-operation
Formation of strategic alliances, e.g. IBM & Sun Microsystems
Collusion
Conspire with competitors to restrain competitive behaviours, e.g. O.P.E.C Figure 7.2 
      How companies 
compete    
Source: Easton 
et al. (1993).
   Value is contextualized rather than absolute. A solution that works 
in one context has value; that same solution, not working in another 
context, has no value. In a B2C context, McDonald’s may have great 
value as a solution to the question,  ‘ where shall I hold my 8-year-old 
daughter’s birthday party? ’  It has less value as a solution to the question, 
 ‘ where shall I take my ﬁ ancée for her 27th birthday? ’
   To create better value for customers, companies have to reinvent 
the numerator (beneﬁ  ts) and/or denominator (sacriﬁ  ces) of the value 

===== PAGE 214 =====
 
Creating value for customers 191
equation. In a B2B context, this is often done in partnership with 
customers on a customer-by-customer basis. Unique solutions may be 
required. In B2C contexts, solutions are more often segment or niche 
speciﬁ c, and are supported by market intelligence. To win and keep 
customers, companies have to constantly seek to improve the value 
they create. Given that this happens in a competitive environment, it is 
necessary not only to keep current with customer requirements, but also 
to stay up to date with competitors ’  efforts to serve these customers. 
    Sources of customer value 
   It is the job of professional marketers to develop the offers that create 
value for customers: the so-called value proposition. We can deﬁ ne value 
proposition as follows: 
  A value proposition is the explicit or implicit promise made by a 
company to its customers that it will deliver a particular bundle of 
value-creating beneﬁ ts. 
  Michael Treacey and Fred Wiersema have identiﬁ  ed three fundamental 
types of value proposition that are delivered by successful companies. 
Indeed, these authors say that companies cannot be all things to all 
customers and need to concentrate on one of these three value delivery 
strategies. The strategies are characterized by product leadership, customer 
intimacy and operational excellence, and are summarized in  Table 7.1   .  
6
Table 7.1        Three 
value disciplines  
   Company traits 
   Value delivery strategies 
 Operational 
excellence
 Product leadership  Customer intimacy 
 Core business 
processes that  …  
 Sharpen distribution 
systems and provide 
no-hassle service 
 Nurture ideas, 
translate them into 
products and market 
them skilfully 
 Provide solutions and 
help customers run 
their businesses 
 Structure that  …   Has strong, central 
authority and 
a ﬁ  nite level of 
empowerment
 Acts in an ad hoc, 
organic, loosely knit 
and ever-changing 
way 
 Pushes empowerment 
close to customer 
contact
 Management systems 
that  …  
 Maintain standard 
operating procedures 
 Reward individuals ’  
innovative capacity 
and new product 
success
 Measure the cost 
of providing service 
and of maintaining 
customer loyalty 
 Culture that  …   Acts predictably and 
believes  ‘ one size 
ﬁ  ts all ’  
 Experiments and 
thinks  ‘ outside of 
the box ’  
 Is ﬂ  exible and thinks 
 ‘ have it your way ’  

===== PAGE 215 =====
 
192 Customer Relationship Management
●       Operational excellence  : companies that pursue this strategy do a 
limited number of things very efﬁ  ciently, at very low cost, and pass 
on those savings to customers. Companies renowned for this are 
Wal-Mart, Giordano and McDonald’s. Unexpectedly, Toyota might 
also ﬁ t this strategy. If customers take a total cost of ownership view 
of price, then Toyota, with its reputation for reliability, durability and 
competitive service costs, ﬁ  ts the operational excellence model well. 
Operational excellence is underpinned by lean manufacturing and 
efﬁ cient supply chains, close cooperation with suppliers, rigorous 
quality and cost controls, process measurement and improvement, 
and management of customer expectations.  
●       Product leadership  : companies aligning with this value discipline 
aim to provide the best products, services or solutions to customers. 
Continuous innovation underpins this strategy. Companies renowned 
for this are 3 M, Intel, GSK, LG and Singapore Airlines. Product 
leadership is reﬂ  ected in a culture that encourages innovation, a 
risk-oriented management style, and investment in research and 
development.
●       Customer intimacy  : companies that pursue this strategy are able to 
adapt their offers to meet the needs of individual customers. Customer 
intimacy is based on customer insight. Companies renowned for 
customer intimacy include Saatchi and Saatchi, McKinsey and the US 
department store, Nordstrom. Adaptation and customization based 
on deep understanding of customer requirements underpin this 
strategy. 
    Value through the marketing mix 
  As mentioned above, it is the responsibility of marketing people to 
develop value propositions. They use a toolkit known as the marketing 
mix. The term ‘ marketing mix ’  is really a metaphor to describe the 
process of combining together various components to create value 
for customers. Eugene McCarthy grouped these components into a 
classiﬁ cation known as the 4Ps: product, price, promotion and place. 
7
This approach is widely applied by goods manufacturers. 
   Services marketing experts in both B2B and B2C contexts have found 
this 4P taxonomy inadequate because it fails to take account of the 
special attributes of services (these were described in the last chapter). 
To recap, services are performances or acts that are, for the most part, 
intangible–dominant, inseparable (produced at the same time and place 
they are consumed), heterogeneous (of variable quality) and perishable. 
   Service marketers ’  response to these special characteristics has 
been to develop a new toolkit for creating customer value. It contains 
another 3Ps, making 7Ps in total. 
8   The additional 3Ps are people, 
physical evidence and process, as shown in  Figure 7.3   . As we shall see 
later, though developed for services contexts, they can provide a useful 
framework for goods manufacturers too. Before we explore each of these 
sources of customer value, we’ll look at the issue of customization. 

===== PAGE 216 =====
 
Creating value for customers 193
    Customization 
   CRM aims to build mutually beneﬁ  cial relationships with customers 
at segment, cohort or individual level. A fundamental approach to 
achieving this goal is to customize the value proposition in order to 
attract and retain targeted customers. CRM aims to ﬁ  t the offer to the 
requirements of the customer; it is not a one-size-ﬁ ts-all approach. 
   Customization has both cost and revenue implications. It may 
make strategic sense because it generates competitive advantage 
and is appealing to customers, but there may be serious reservations 
because of the costs of customization. Companies need to ask whether 
investment in customization will generate a return higher than they 
could achieve through other strategies carrying a similar amount of risk. 
Customization may mean the loss of economies of scale, thus increasing 
unit costs. There may also be additional technology costs.
Good marketing mix Service marketing mix
–  Product –  Product
–  Price –  Price
–  Promotion –  Promotion
–  Place –  Place
– Process
– Participants
– Physical evidence
 Figure 7.3 
      Sources of customer 
value    
       Case 7.1   
  Dell Computer customizes production using a product conﬁ gurator      
   When Dell Computer’s customers are online, they are able to design their own computers. 
Customers interface with the front end of a technology called a conﬁ  gurator. This is a rule-
based system that enables or disables certain combinations of product features including 
chassis, hard disk capacity, memory, processor speed, software and connectivity. The 
technology is connected to back-ofﬁ  ce functions such as assembly and procurement. Each 
Dell Computer is made to order. 
  Customization means that companies have to be aware of, and responsive 
to, customers ’  differing requirements. Information systems designed to 
capture, store and distribute customer-related data also have a cost. 

===== PAGE 217 =====
 
194 Customer Relationship Management
   Conﬁ gurator technologies can be quite sophisticated. In their simplest 
form they contain a set of rules (if the customer chooses chassis A, only 
allow one hard disk). At the other end of the spectrum are constraint-
based optimization technologies. The constraints are applied in a 
systematic way to ensure the ﬁ  nal conﬁ  guration is optimum, for 
example, in producing least cost products. 
  Customization has been the norm in B2B markets for many years. 
Suppliers routinely make adaptations to suit the needs of customers. 
It is also true that customers make adaptations to suit suppliers. These 
adaptations serve as investments that make the relationship hard to break. 
As shown in Figure 7.4   , suppliers can adapt, or customize, any of the 
7Ps regardless of whether they manufacture goods or perform services. 
Although the additional 3Ps were developed for service companies, they 
also apply in the manufacturing context, as these examples show. 
Product – Solvay Interox, a chemicals company, customizes its hydrogen peroxide 
product for textile industry customers
Price – Dell Computer offers lower prices to its larger relationship customers than its
small office-home office (SOHO) customers
Promotion – Ford customizes communications to its dealership network
Place – Procter and Gamble delivers direct to store for its major retail customers but
not smaller independents
People – Hewlett Packard creates dedicated virtual project groups for its consultancy clients
Physical evidence – Thomson and other major tour operators overprint their point-of-sale
material with travel agency details
Process – Xerox customizes its service guarantee and recovery processes for individual
customers
 Figure 7.4 
      Customizing the 7Ps    
●       Process : important manufacturing industry processes are the order 
fulﬁ lment process and the new product development process. 
Manufacturers can customize these to suit the requirements of 
different customers. Major FMCG manufacturers have evolved twin 
new product development processes. They have their own in-house 
processes, as well as customized processes in which they co-develop 
new products in partnership with major retailers.  
●       People : manufacturers can adjust the proﬁ  le and membership of 
account teams to ensure that customers get the service they deserve 
and can afford. Kraft, for example, has customer teams for major retail 
accounts that consist of a customer business manager (c.f. key account 
manager), category planner, retail sales manager, sales information 
specialist, retail space management and supply chain specialist. This 
customer-facing team can then draw on additional company expertise 
if needed, including brand managers and logistics specialists. The 

===== PAGE 218 =====
 
Creating value for customers 195
       Case 7.3   
  Tailored value propositions at Heineken Ireland      
   Heineken, a major beer exporter, has been very successful in the Irish beer market, with 
brands collectively capturing around 17 per cent of the total market. This success has 
been attributed to a deep understanding of the market, a strong portfolio of brands and 
a commitment to customer satisfaction. To sustain its position, Heineken sought to focus 
on delivering superior service to its 9000 commercial customers, namely pubs, hotels and 
wholesalers. To accomplish this Heineken implemented a Siebel CRM system. 
  For Heineken, one advantage of the Siebel software has been its ability to create single, 
comprehensive, proﬁ les of customers which can be used to tailor product bundles and 
services, and to provide improved levels of customer service. Heineken believes that the CRM 
system provides the ability to build higher quality relationships with customers. For example, 
sales representatives are able to prioritize their interactions with key customers and instantly 
analyse historical data to identify sales trends and buying patterns of both individual 
customers and geographic areas, using their notebook computers while on the road. 
composition and membership of the team is agreed with each major 
retail account.  
●       Physical evidence : manufacturers use many different forms of physical 
evidence, such as scale models, cut-away models, product samples and 
collateral materials. Kitchen manufacturers provide customized swatches 
of worktop and cabinet colours to their major retail distributors. 
    Mass customization 
  A distinction can be made between  ‘ craft customization ’  and  ‘ mass 
customization ’ . The latter implies that an organization can communicate 
with target audiences at a mass or segment level, but is also able to 
offer customized value propositions for individual customers. Craft 
customization involves customized offers, but not at a mass market level. 
   Mass customization can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 Mass customization is the use of ﬂ exible processes and organizational 
structures to create varied, and even individually tailored, value 
propositions, with neither a cost nor a lead time penalty. 
   This is not the same as offering customers more choice, customers 
certainly want their needs to be met; they do not necessarily want choice. 
Giving customers ’  choice has been the default strategy when companies 
have been unable to identify and meet customers ’  precise requirements. 
Choice means work for the customer in comparing offers; work adds to 
the cost of the consumption process. 
  A number of different types of mass customization have been 
identiﬁ ed, as shown in  Table 7.2   .
9   A relatively minor form of mass 
customization involves ‘ match to order ’ . This simply involves ﬁ  nding 

===== PAGE 219 =====
 
196 Customer Relationship Management
a match, from a range of standard products, to a particular customer’s 
requirements. At the other extreme is  ‘ engineer to order ’ , which involves 
the co-design, in a joint enterprise between customer and supplier, of a 
unique solution to that customer’s problem. 
Table 7.2        Different 
forms of mass 
customization  
 Type of mass 
customization
 How it works  Example 
   Minor  Match-to-order or 
locate-to-order
 Selection of existing standard 
products or services to match 
customer requirements 
 Cars 
 Bundle-to-order  Bundling of existing products and 
services to suit customer requirements 
 Conferences 
 Assemble-to-order  Assembly of products or services 
from existing standardized components 
or processes 
 Computers 
 Make-to-order  Manufacture of customized products 
including components 
 Tailored suits 
   Major  Engineer-to-order  Customer co-designs products or services 
which are then made-to-order 
 Aircraft 
  It is in B2C markets that mass customization has lately become more 
widespread. Until recently, most B2C companies have either mass 
marketed standardized products or have developed product variants 
for particular niches. A growing number are now attempting to mass 
customize their offers. This is enabled by databases that store customer 
preferences, Internet-enabled interactivity that permits companies to learn 
about changing customer requirements through improved communication, 
modular product design, ﬂ  exible manufacturing operations and supply 
chains, and mass customization technologies. 
   Mass customization is widespread in service industries serving 
end consumers. This is largely because of the inseparability of service 
production and consumption. The interaction between consumers and 
service producers during the service encounter lets customers inﬂ  uence 
both the service delivery process and the outcome. 
  Mass customization is also becoming more common in manufacturing 
companies. Dell Computer’s mass customization model allows customers 
to design up to 14  000 different personal computer conﬁ  gurations. Ford 
was able to produce 27 million different Ford Fiestas, more than were 
actually sold. 
   Key issues for CRM strategists are these: 
    1.     Do customers want customized products and services? 
    2.     What degree of customization is desired? 
    3.     Are customers willing to pay a premium for customization? 

===== PAGE 220 =====
 
Creating value for customers 197
   Frank Piller and Melanie Müller have reviewed the research on these 
questions, paying particular attention to the shoe manufacturing 
industry.  
10   They found that consumers generally are aware of and 
value the beneﬁ ts of mass customization (for shoe customers, better ﬁ  t 
is the single most important beneﬁ  t, followed at some distance by style 
and functionality), and the majority are willing to pay a premium – 
particularly women. Willingness to pay more varies across brands 
and customer segments. Adidas, for example, is able to command a 
50 per cent price premium for customized sports shoes. Customization, 
however, does not universally mean that customers pay more. Some 
customized products eliminate features that have no value for customers, 
resulting in lower costs which are passed on in reduced prices. 
  Not all customer segments are willing to pay for mass customization. 
Levi Strauss has three different routes to market: jeans specialists, 
department stores and their own Original Levi Stores. Each channel 
reaches different market segments, and the company offers different 
product lines in each type of store. The Original Levi Store is the only 
channel where the company has offered mass customization. Customer 
measurements taken in-store are fed into the production system. A week or 
so later the customer receives a pair of customized Levi jeans. For Levi’s, 
this differentiation allowed them to maintain a price premium in this one 
channel that has been impossible to achieve in their other channels. For 
customers there was the added value that the jeans ﬁ tted perfectly. 
  Amazon.com has become the world’s largest and most successful 
online retailer, diversifying from books and CDs into other areas such 
as electronics and clothing. Much of Amazon’s continued success has 
been related to its CRM strategy of retaining customers and growing 
share of wallet. Amazon utilizes CRM software to customize offerings 
to each customer. Based on information, such as previous purchases and 
products that have recently been browsed, Amazon’s CRM software can 
predict a range of other products the customer is likely to be interested 
in. For example, a customer who purchases an Ernest Hemingway novel 
may receive a recommendation to purchase another novel by the author 
or a DVD documentary of Hemingway’s life. Your author’s customized 
Amazon.com webpage is presented in  Figure 7.5   .  
   Over the next few paragraphs we’ll look at how value can be created 
by astute management of the marketing mix variables. 
    Value from products 
   Companies may make products, but customers do not buy products. 
Customers buy solutions to their problems. They buy beneﬁ  ts or, 
better said, they buy the expectation of beneﬁ  ts. Nobody ever buys 
a lawnmower because they want a lawnmower; people want attractive 
lawns. Products are means to ends. 
   Products that offer better solutions to problems create more value for 
customers. A better solution is one in which the balance between beneﬁ ts 
and sacriﬁ ces of the value equation is enhanced for the customer. 

===== PAGE 221 =====
 
198 Customer Relationship Management
 Figure 7.5        Francis Buttle’s Amazon.com customized webpage    
  Marketers often distinguish between different levels of the product, 
sometimes known as a customer value hierarchy. 11   The  core  product is 
the basic beneﬁ t that customers buy. Companies competing for customer 
demand must be able to meet the core beneﬁ  t requirements. Let’s 
consider the market for MBA-level education. MBA students typically are 
buying one or more of three basic beneﬁ  ts: salary enhancement, career 
development or personal growth. A second level is the  enabling  product. 
This consists of the physical goods and services that are necessary for 
the core beneﬁ t to be delivered. In the MBA case, this would comprise 
the buildings, classroom ﬁ xtures, faculty and educational technology. A 
third level, the  augmented  product consists of the factors that position 
and differentiate one competitor from another. In the MBA illustration 
this might be teaching method, for example, learning through real life 
projects, or an extensive international exchange programme, or a leafy out 
of town location. 
   Companies offering the same core beneﬁ t have to compete to deliver 
value to customers through enablers and augmentations. As Ted Levitt 
noted:
  …  competition is not between what companies produce in their 
factories, but between what they add to their factory output in the 
form of packaging, services, advertising, customer advice, ﬁ nancing, 
delivery arrangements, warehousing and other things that people 
value.
12
   Product-based value is created for customers through product 
innovation, additional beneﬁ ts, product–service bundling, branding and 
product synergies. We explore these below. 

===== PAGE 222 =====
 
Creating value for customers 199
    Product innovation 
   Most  ‘ new ’  products are modiﬁ cations of existing products, cost 
reductions or line extensions. Very few products are  ‘ new to the world ’
or create new product categories. New products in all of these categories 
can improve customer value perceptions, but it is the dramatic ground-
breaking inventions that create leaps in customer value. History is 
littered with them: Stephenson’s locomotive, Edison’s incandescent light 
bulb, Hargreaves’s spinning jenny and Newcomen’s steam engine. More 
recently we have had the Sony Walkman and Apple iPod. 
   Occasionally, old technologies provide value-creating modern day 
solutions. Trevor Bayliss invented the wind-up radio after seeing 
a programme about the spread of AIDS in Africa. The programme 
highlighted the difﬁ culty that health professionals faced getting safe sex 
messages to rural and poor areas where there were no power sources 
for conventional radios. Thirtyﬁ  ve per cent of the world has no access 
to electricity. Large-scale manufacturing of the Freeplay® wind-up 
radio began in 1995. The radio has two energy sources: dynamo power 
and solar cells. The product has created value for all concerned: the 
manufacturers, investors, resellers, employees, Bayliss and, of course, 
radio audiences. It has sold over two million units, and the technology 
has also been applied to lanterns and mobile phone chargers.  
    Additional beneﬁ ts 
   Companies can create value for customers by attaching additional 
beneﬁ ts to their products. A lawnmower operates more quietly. A car 
comes with a ﬁ ve-year warranty. A forklift truck is supplied with a free 
options package. Sometimes additional beneﬁ  ts are accompanied by 
repositioning the product in a different segment of the market. Lucozade 
had been a glucose drink for older people and was widely associated 
with illness. The brand owner, GlaxoSmithKline, repositioned this 
product as an energy drink in the rapidly growing sports drink market, 
where it has enjoyed considerable success (see  Figure 7.6   ). 
   Low involvement product categories have low personal signiﬁ cance or 
relevance to customers. Customers feel very little sense of commitment 
to any brand and are therefore easily switched to competitors. Adding 
additional beneﬁ ts helps brand owners to increase the level of customer 
involvement. There are two main approaches: product modiﬁ cation and 
product association. Product modiﬁ cation means changing the product 
in some way so that it ties in more closely to the customer’s needs, values 
and interests. Detergent manufacturers, for example, have reformulated 
their brands so that they are more environmentally friendly. Diaper 
manufacturers have resegmented the market so that there are different 
products for boys and girls, day and night, babies of different weights 
and even  ‘ swimmer ’  models. Product association means linking the 
brand to some issue or context that is of high importance to customers. 
PlayStation, for example, links a soccer computer game to the FIFA 
World Cup, while Mobil tied its brand to the Olympics, donating to 
sports funds for every gallon or litre purchased.  

===== PAGE 223 =====
 
200 Customer Relationship Management
    Product–service bundling 
   Product–service bundling is the practice of offering customers a package 
of goods and services at a single price. Tour operators routinely bundle 
several elements of a vacation together: ﬂ ights, transfers, accommodation 
and meal plans, for example. For the customer, bundling can reduce 
money, search and psychic costs. For the company, there are economies 
in selling and marketing. 
   Changing the composition of a bundle can increase customer 
perceived value; adding or removing elements from the bundle can both 
have this effect. Adding elements to the bundle increases the beneﬁ  ts 
side of the value equation. In a B2C context, for example, supermarket 
operators can offer a bagging service at the checkout at no extra cost to 
the customer. If the people performing this task are diverted from other 
tasks, then there may be no additional costs for the operator. Removing 
elements from the bundle enables the company to establish a new price 
point, therefore adjusting the value equation for customers. In a B2B 
context, companies often ask for elements to be removed from a bundle 
in return for a lower price. For example, a training college with its own 
IT department may ask the supplier of its IT equipment for a lower price 
in return for not using the supplier’s help desk and IT support facilities. 
If the price is reduced by $5000 and the saving to the supplier is $6000, 
then both parties win.  
    Branding 
   A brand can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 A brand is any name, design, style, word or symbol that distinguishes 
a product from its competitors. 
 Figure 7.6 
      Repositioning 
Lucozade as a sports 
drink    

===== PAGE 224 =====
 
Creating value for customers 201
   Brands create value for customers in a number of ways, on both sides 
of the value equation. Brands reduce search costs by clearly identifying 
one product as different from others. Brands can also reduce psychic 
costs. Over time, customers assign meanings to brands. If you buy a 
Mercedes vehicle, it may be because you understand that the brand 
attributes are excellence in engineering, assured quality build and high 
resale value. A customer who understands what the brand means is less 
at risk than a customer who does not understand. Brand knowledge like 
this is acquired from experience, word-of-mouth or marketer-controlled 
communication. Brands also offer an implicit assurance of a particular 
customer experience. For example, when you buy any products carrying 
the Virgin brand it may be because you believe that Virgin’s brand 
values are service excellence, innovation and good value.  
    Product synergies 
   Companies can create value for customers by ﬁ nding synergies between 
products in the company’s product portfolio. For example, if you take 
a Virgin ﬂ  ight you will be offered a Virgin cola. If you buy Microsoft 
software, the company will offer you complementary software for 
related applications. These synergies are also sometimes created from 
relationships within a company’s network. 
   Disney is particularly good at exploiting synergies. Disney characters, 
such as Snow White and the Little Mermaid, are created in Disney’s 
ﬁ lm division. The characters then appear in theme parks around the 
world, in the USA, Paris, Tokyo and Hong Kong, and in other service 
environments such as cruises, retail stores and on the Disney TV 
network. Finally, the characters are licensed for use in other applications. 
For example, you’ll ﬁ  nd Disney characters on lunch boxes and school 
bags, on clothing and shoes, and on McDonald’s packaging for special 
movie-linked promotions. 
    Value from service 
  A service, as noted earlier, is a performance or act performed for a customer. 
Service is an important part of many companies ’  value propositions. In 
most developed economies, about 70 per cent of gross domestic product is 
created by service organizations. For these organizations, service is the core 
product. Even in manufacturing ﬁ rms, service is often an important part of 
the enabling and augmented product. For example, carpet manufacturers 
make ﬂ  oor coverings to international standards. While there is some 
potential to compete through product innovation, many manufacturers 
believe the best way to compete is through offering better service to their 
distributors, and corporate and domestic customers. Typical services 
include stockholding, design, measurement, cutting to order, delivery and 
ﬁ tting. Companies need to understand that their efforts to improve service 
should be focused. Companies should ﬁ nd out what service elements are 
important to customers and where performance needs to be improved. If 
the customer’s biggest problem is your failure to deliver on time, in full 

===== PAGE 225 =====
 
202 Customer Relationship Management
and with no errors, it makes little sense to invest in updating the livery of 
your vehicles and drivers. 
   In this section we look at a number of service-related methods for 
creating value: improving service quality, service guarantees, service 
level agreements and service recovery programmes. 
    Service quality 
   There are two major perspectives on service quality: 
    1 .       Quality is conformance to speciﬁ cation : this is consistent with Philip 
Crosby’s view of quality.  13   Conformance to speciﬁ cation might mean: 
     –     producing error-free invoices 
     –     delivering on time, in full as promised to customers 
     –     acknowledging a customer complaint within 24 hours. 
   2 .       Quality is ﬁ tness for purpose  : Joseph M. Juran advanced the point 
of view that quality means creating products that are well suited to 
customer requirements, and which therefore meet their expectations. 
It is the customer, not the company, who decides whether quality is 
right.
14   If you are a farmer, a Land Rover is the right quality vehicle. If 
you are an executive limousine company, a Mercedes is the right quality 
vehicle. In a services environment, ﬁ tness for purpose might mean 
     –      allowing the customer to select a preferred communication channel 
(phone, e-mail or postal service)  
     –      recruiting customer contact staff who are highly empathic and 
responsive  
     –     customizing service delivery for customers. 
   These perspectives on quality can happily coexist. Speciﬁ  cations for 
service performance can be based on customer expectations. If customers 
determine the standards, there need be no conﬂ  ict between these two 
approaches. 
    Service quality theories 
   Two service quality theories have dominated management practice as 
companies try to improve their service performance: the SERVQUAL 
model and the Nordic model. 
   The Nordic model, originated by Christian Grönroos and developed 
by others, identiﬁ es three components of service quality: 
●      technical  
●      functional  
●      reputational ( Table 7.3   ).15
   Technical  The quality of the outcome of a service performance 
   Functional  The quality of the performance of a service 
   Reputational  The quality of the service organization’s image 
Table 7.3        Grönroos 
model of service 
quality  16    

===== PAGE 226 =====
 
Creating value for customers 203
   Technical quality can be thought of as the  ‘ what ’  of service quality. Was 
the ﬂ oor vacuumed thoroughly and surfaces dusted meticulously by the 
ofﬁ ce cleaning contractor? Was the stock check performed professionally 
by the specialist audit ﬁ rm? Functional quality can be thought of as the 
 ‘ how ’  of service quality. Was the cleaner courteous? Was the stock-check 
team responsive? Reputational quality is both a product of technical and 
functional quality, in that reputation derives from performance, and it 
also produces a halo effect which can inﬂ  uence customer perceptions of 
quality, for better or worse. If I’m attending an opera at Teatro alla Scala 
(La Scala) in Milano then it must be good. If I’m receiving service from 
a state monopoly then it must be bad. 
   The signiﬁ cance of this model is that it stresses the importance of 
understanding customer expectations and of developing a service 
delivery system that performs well at meeting customers ’  technical and 
functional service quality expectations. 
   The SERVQUAL model, developed by A.  ‘ Parsu ’  Parasuraman and 
colleagues in North America, identiﬁ  es ﬁ ve core components of service 
quality: reliability, assurance, tangibles, empathy and responsiveness, as 
deﬁ ned in  Table 7.4   .
17   You can remember them through the mnemonic 
RATER. 
   Reliability  Ability to perform the promised service dependably and accurately 
   Assurance  Knowledge and courtesy of employees and their ability to convey trust and conﬁ  dence 
   Tangibles  Appearance of physical facilities, equipment, personnel and communication materials 
   Empathy  Provision of caring, individualized attention to customers 
   Responsiveness  Willingness to help customers and to provide prompt service 
Table 7.4       SERVQUAL 
components  18    
   The SERVQUAL authors have also developed a measurement 
and management model to accompany the conceptual model. The 
measurement model uses a 44-item questionnaire that measures 
customers ’  expectations and perceptions of the RATER variables. 
19   The 
relative importance of these variables is also measured. This enables you 
to compute the relative importance of any gaps between expectation 
and perceptions. Management can then focus on strategies and tactics to 
close the important gaps. 
   The management model, reproduced in  Figure 7.7   , identiﬁ es the 
reasons for any gaps between customer expectations and perceptions 
(gap 5). Gap 5 is the product of gaps 1, 2, 3 and 4. If these four gaps, all 
of which are located below the line that separates the customer from the 
company, are closed then gap 5 will close. The gaps are as follows: 
●      Gap 1 is the gap between what the customer expects and what the 
company’s management thinks customers expect.  

===== PAGE 227 =====
 
204 Customer Relationship Management
●      Gap 2 occurs when management fails to design service standards that 
meet customer expectations.  
●      Gap 3 occurs when the company’s service delivery systems – people, 
processes and technologies – fail to deliver to the speciﬁ ed standard. 
●      Gap 4 occurs when the company’s communications with customers 
promise a level of service performance that the service delivery 
system cannot provide. 
Word of mouth
communications Personal needs Past experience
Expected service
Perceived service
Service delivery (incl.
pre- and post contacts)
Translation of perceptions into
service quality specifications
Management perceptions
of customer expectations
External communications
to consumers
Gap 5
Gap 3
Gap 2
Gap 1
CustomerCompany
Gap 4
 Figure 7.7 
      The SERVQUAL gaps 
model    
   The importance of SERVQUAL is that it offers managers a systematic 
approach to measuring and managing service quality. It emphasizes the 
importance of understanding customer expectations (see Figure 7.8   ), 
and of developing internal procedures that align company processes to 
customer expectations. Among the strategies and tactics that might be 
employed to close gaps 1–4 are the following: 
    1.     To close gap 1 (between what customers expect and what managers 
think customers expect): 
   –      conduct primary research into customers ’  service quality expectations  
     –     learn from front-line customer contact staff  
     –      ﬂ atten the hierarchical structure  
     –     include expectations data in customer records. 
    2.     To close gap 2 (between what managers think customers expect and 
service quality speciﬁ cations): 
     –     commit to the development of service standards wherever possible 
     –     assess the feasibility of meeting customer expectations 
     –     develop a standards documentation process 
     –     automate processes where possible and desirable  

===== PAGE 228 =====
 
Creating value for customers 205
     –     outsource activities where you lack the competencies 
     –     develop service quality goals. 
    3.     To close gap 3 (between service quality speciﬁ cations and actual 
service delivery): 
     –     invest in people: recruitment, training and retention  
     –     invest in technology 
     –     redesign workﬂ ow  
     –     encourage self-organized teams 
     –     improve internal communication 
     –     write clear job speciﬁ cations  
     –     reward service excellence. 
    4.     To close gap 4 (between actual service delivery and the promises 
communicated to customers): 
     –     brief advertising agency on customer service expectations 
     –     train employees not to overpromise  
     –     penalize employees who overpromise  
     –     encourage customers to sample the service experience 
     –     excel at service recovery  
     –     encourage and manage customer complaints. 
  There is growing evidence that investment in service quality 
improvements pays off in enhanced customer satisfaction and customer 
retention, although like other investments there does appear to be a point 
at which diminishing returns set in. 
20
Support
my situation
Fundamental
service
performance
Support the
customer’s
activity
Tailoring
of the
service
Support what I
need/want to do
Help me
through the process
Get me there on time
Get my stuff there as well
Get me there safely  Figure 7.8 
      SAS airlines ’  
understanding
of customer 
expectations    
   The SERVQUAL model has been subject to much criticism, but it is 
still in widespread use in original and customized forms. 21   One criticism 
is that customers often do not have clearly formed expectations, and 

===== PAGE 229 =====
 
206 Customer Relationship Management
therefore that the disconﬁ  rmation approach is inappropriate. Some of 
these critics have developed an alternative, perceptions-only, model of 
service quality that they have dubbed SERVPERF.  22
    Service guarantees 
   From the customer’s perspective, guarantees can be an effective way 
to reduce risk and thereby increase value. A service guarantee can be 
deﬁ ned as follows: 
A service guarantee is an explicit promise to the customer that a prescribed 
level of service will be delivered.
Service guarantees can either be speciﬁ  c or general. Speciﬁ  c service 
guarantees apply to particular parts of the customer experience. For 
example:
    Sleep tight or it’s a free night. We guarantee it (Howard Johnson’s).  
    PG & E will meet the agreed upon appointment time set with our 
customer during contact with our call centre or automatically credit 
your account with $30 (Paciﬁ c Gas and Electric). 
   General service guarantees apply to the entire customer experience (see 
 Figure 7.9   ). For example: 
    We guarantee to give perfect satisfaction in every way (LL Bean).  
    Guaranteed. Period (Land’s End). 
 Figure 7.9 
      ADT Money-Back Service Guarantee23  

===== PAGE 230 =====
 
Creating value for customers 207
  Although these examples are of guarantees offered to external customers, 
they can also be designed for internal customers. For example, the 
housekeeping supplies department at Embassy Suites guarantees that 
its internal customer, the housekeeping department, will get supplies on 
the day requested. If not, the department pays $5 to the housekeeper. 
   Service guarantees can be customized for individual customers or 
segments. An IT service centre guarantees a three hour service to priority 
one customers and 48 hour service to all others. Should the company fail 
to honour these guarantees it ‘ ﬁ nes ’  itself by issuing a credit note to the 
customers.
  Some guarantees, such as the Land’s End example cited above, are 
unconditional. Others are conditional. For example, the PG & E guarantee 
above does not apply when a customer makes a same day appointment or 
when a service person misses the appointment to respond to an immediate 
emergency. If the guarantee is unconditional and the consequence of 
invoking the guarantee is that customer doesn’t have to pay, there is 
effectively zero ﬁ nancial risk. 
    Service-level agreements 
   Service-level agreements (SLAs) can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 A service level agreement is a contractual commitment between 
a service provider and a customer that speciﬁ  es the mutual 
responsibilities of both parties with respect to the services that will be 
provided and the standards at which they will be performed. 
   SLAs can apply to both internal and external customer relationships. For 
example, it is not uncommon for utility companies to outsource their 
customer contact function to a third party. An external SLA is negotiated 
that carefully deﬁ  nes both parties ’  expectations of the services to be 
performed, the service processes to be followed, the service standards to 
be achieved and the price to be paid. The SLA may well form part of 
an enforceable legal contract. A number of metrics are used to measure 
performance of the supplier and compliance with SLA service standards. 
These include: 
●       availability : the percentage of time that the service is available over 
an agreed time period  
●       usage : the number of service users that can be served simultaneously.  
●       reliability : the percentage of time that the service is withdrawn or 
fails in the time period  
●       responsiveness : the speed with which a demand for service is 
fulﬁ lled. This can be measured using turn-around time or cycle-time  
●       user satisfaction:   this can be measured at the time the service is 
delivered or periodically throughout the agreed service period. 
   See  Figure 7.10    for an example of a service level agreement scorecard. 
   Many companies also have internal SLAs between service departments 
and their internal customers. An IT services department, for example, 
may establish a number of different SLAs with different customer 
groups. It might undertake to process payroll for the human resource 

===== PAGE 231 =====
 
208 Customer Relationship Management
department or to maintain and service desktop devices for a contact 
centre. This is unlikely to be formalized in a contract. 
   SLAs create value for customers by reducing uncertainty about the 
services that will be delivered, their standards and costs. A successful 
SLA clariﬁ es the boundaries and relative roles of customer and supplier. 
Each knows the other’s responsibility. Service automation technologies 
discussed in Chapter 16 allow companies to manage service levels.  
    Service recovery programmes 
   Service recovery can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 Service recovery includes all the actions taken by a company to 
resolve a service failure.   
   Services fail for many different reasons.  25   Sometimes technical service 
quality fails; at other times the failure is in functional service quality. 
Sometimes the fault lies with the company, sometimes with the customer 
and sometimes with a network member. Typically customers are not 
concerned with who is to blame; they just want the situation resolved. 
   Research shows that when companies resolve problems quickly and 
effectively there are positive consequences for customer satisfaction, 
customer retention and word-of-mouth.  
26   It has even been found that 
customers who have been let down, then well recovered, are more 
satisﬁ ed than customers who have not been let down at all. 27   This can 
perhaps be explained in terms of the RATER dimensions of service 
 Figure 7.10 
      Service level 
agreement
scorecard
24    

===== PAGE 232 =====
 
Creating value for customers 209
quality. Getting service right ﬁ  rst time demonstrates reliability, but 
recovering well after service failure shows empathy and responsiveness. 
Reliability can be programmed into a company’s service production and 
delivery processes. Empathy and responsiveness demonstrate the human 
attributes of concern for others and ﬂ  exibility. Conversely, customers 
who have been let down once, only to experience unsatisfactory 
recovery, can turn into  ‘ terrorists ’  who actively look for opportunities to 
spread bad word-of-mouth.  
28
   When customers experience service failure, they have the choice of 
doing nothing or voicing their displeasure. Customers who choose to 
voice their feelings can complain to the service provider, complain to 
associates and others in their personal network, or complain to a third 
party such as a consumer affairs organization or industry ombudsman. 
   Equity theory suggests that customers who complain are seeking 
justice and fairness. Equity theory explains that customers compare the 
sacriﬁ ces they make and the beneﬁ  ts they experience (as in the value 
equation) to other customers ’  sacriﬁ ces and beneﬁ  ts. When customers 
pay the same price, but experience an unsatisfactory level of service 
compared to other customers, they feel a sense on inequity or unfairness. 
When they complain, they want the company to ﬁ x the imbalance. They 
want justice. 
  Research suggests that there are different types of justice.  Figure 7.11    
highlights the three forms of justice that complainants seek: distributive 
justice, procedural justice and interactional justice. 
29   Distributive justice 
is achieved if the customer gets the material outcome wanted after a 
complaint. Customers might be satisﬁ  ed with an apology or a credit 
note against future purchases. Alternatively, a customer may want the 
service to be reperformed. If distributive justice is concerned with what is 
received, procedural justice is concerned with the customers ’  evaluation 
of the processes and systems that are encountered during the complaints 
handling episode. Customers generally do not want to complete forms, 
provide difﬁ  cult-to-ﬁ nd proofs of purchase or write formal letters 
conﬁ rming the complaint. These requirements do not suggest that 
Distributive justice
– what the firm offers by way of recovery and whether this output offsets the costs incurred by the 
customer from service failure
distributive outcomes include compensation, re-performance, apologies –
Procedural justice
– customers’ perception of the process experienced to obtain recovery
some procedures offer prompt recovery, others delayed; some require complaints to be legitimized–
Interactional justice
– the customer’s perception of the performance of service recovery people
empathy, politeness, courtesy, effort–
 Figure 7.11 
      Service recovery and 
justice seeking    

===== PAGE 233 =====
 
210 Customer Relationship Management
a company is organized and willing to resolve the problem quickly. 
Interactional justice is achieved if the customer judges that speciﬁ  c 
complaint-related interactions with the provider’s people have been 
satisfactory. They want employees to be responsive and empathetic. 
   Value from processes 
   In the previous section we have described some business processes that 
help create customer perceived value: the service quality management 
process and the service recovery process. Elsewhere in the book we 
touch on additional processes that impact on customers: the order-
to-cash cycle, the selling process, the campaign management process, the 
database development process and the innovation process, for example. 
  In Chapter 3 we deﬁ  ned a business process as a set of activities 
performed by people and/or technology in order to achieve a desired 
outcome. Business processes are how companies get things done. 
Companies are comprised of very large processes. IBM, for example, has 
identiﬁ ed 18 critical processes, Xerox 14 and Dow Chemical 9.  
30   These big 
processes are in turn composed of smaller processes. For example, the 
manufacturing process takes a number of inputs – materials, technology, 
labour – and converts them into products. This big process is composed 
of several smaller processes, such as machining, assembly and packing 
processes. Companies have thousands of processes. But processes are 
more than simply workﬂ  ow; they are also resources that can be used to 
compete more effectively, to create more value for both customers and 
company. 
31   Xerox’s 14 key business processes appear in  Figure 7.12   . Many 
of these macro-processes have an impact upon customer experience or 
value perceptions, including customer engagement, market management, 
product maintenance and product design and engineering processes. 
1. Customer engagement
2. Inventory management and logistics
3. Product design and engineering
4. Product maintenance
5. Technology management
6. Production and operations management
7. Market management
 8.  Supplier management
 9.  Information management
 10.  Business management
 11.  Human resource management
 12.  Leased and capital asset management
 13.  Legal
 14.  Financial management
 Figure 7.12 
      Xerox’s 14 key 
business processes    
  Process innovation can create signiﬁ  cant value for customers. For 
example, First Direct started out as a telephone bank with no branch 
network. Customer management was entirely IT enabled, with customer 
service being delivered from a number of call centres. The bank’s customer 

===== PAGE 234 =====
 
Creating value for customers 211
   In this section, we examine one additional process that impacts on the 
external customer’s perception of value: the complaints management 
process. 
   The complaints management process 
  Customers complain when they experience one of two conditions: their 
expectations are under-performed to a degree that falls outside their zone 
of tolerance, or they sense they have been treated unfairly. Equity theory, 
described above, explains the customer’s response to being treated 
unfairly. Customers also have a zone of tolerance for service and product 
performance. The range of tolerable performance will depend upon 
the importance of the product or the particular product attribute that is 
giving cause for complaint. Tolerances will be stricter for more important 
products and attributes. For unimportant products and attributes, 
customers tend to be less demanding. Where customer experience falls 
outside their zone of tolerance, there is cause for complaint. 
   Nobody likes receiving complaints, but they are unavoidable. Even the 
best companies sometimes fail customers and give cause for complaint. 
Therefore, it makes sense to implement a policy and process to receive, 
handle and resolve customer complaints. A positive view of customer 
complaints accepts that customers who complain are giving you a 
chance to win them back and retain their future value. Not only that, but 
complaints provide information that can help you identify, and correct, 
root causes of problems. Furthermore, the presence of a documented 
complaints-handling process has been shown to be strongly associated 
with excellent customer retention.  
32   Worryingly, customers who don’t 
complain may already have taken their business elsewhere. 
       Case 7.3   
  Process innovation at SECOM      
   SECOM is the largest supplier of security services in Japan. Historically, service was very 
labour intensive as security guards were located at client sites. SECOM automated the 
detection of security breaches by combining crime detection sensors and telecommunications 
technology and moving its guards to a central location, from where they were despatched to 
deal with incidents. The business experienced high growth as a result. Subsequently, new 
technologies were added; remote sensing, image enhancement, geographical information 
systems and automated payment systems for clients. 
satisfaction ratings have been consistently higher than competitors ’  branch 
operations. Daewoo established a direct-to-customer distribution channel 
that replaced the normal distributor arrangements of other automobile 
manufacturers. Customer experience was under better control and costs 
were reduced. easyJet speeded up customer service by improving plane 
turnaround times from 50 minutes to 33 through improved teamwork.

===== PAGE 235 =====
 
212 Customer Relationship Management
  A successful complaints handling process enables companies to capture 
customer complaints before customers start spreading negative word-
of-mouth or take their business elsewhere. Research suggests that negative 
word-of-mouth can be very inﬂ  uential.  33   Up to two-thirds of customers 
who are dissatisﬁ ed do not complain to the organization.  34   They may, 
however, complain to their social networks. Unhappy customers are likely 
to tell twice as many people about their experience as customers with a 
positive experience. 35
   Many customers who are unhappy don’t complain. Why? There are 
a number of possible reasons: 
●      They feel the company doesn’t care. Perhaps the company or the 
industry has a reputation for treating customers poorly.  
●      It takes too much time and effort.  
●      They fear retribution. Many people are reluctant to complain about 
the police, for example.  
●      They don’t know how to complain. 
   Companies can address all of these issues by making their customers 
aware of their complaints policy and processes. A complaints 
management process that is simple and easy to access should facilitate 
the capture of complaints. Some companies use dedicated freephone and 
fax lines. Some reward complainants. Stew Leonard’s, the Connecticut 
retailer, rewards in-store complainants with an ice-cream. 
  Complaints enter companies at many different customer touchpoints – 
accounts receivable, order processing, sales engineering, logistics, 
customer contact centre – and so on. A well-designed complaints-handling 
process will capture complaints from various touchpoints and then 
aggregate and analyse them to identify root causes. Ultimately this should 
enable the company to achieve a higher level of ﬁ  rst-time reliability, 
reduce the amount of rework, and lift levels of customer satisfaction and 
 1. Make your complaints-handling policy and processes visible and accessible to 
  customers and employees
 2. Train employees how to respond to complaints
 3. Ask for specifics. Not ‘what do you think about your experience?’. Instead ask,
  ‘what one thing could we have done better?’
 4. Empower employees to resolve complaints
 5. Install a dedicated free-phone line
 6. Link complaints to your mission to become more customer-focussed
 7. Designate a customer service executive to deal with written complaints
 8. Enable customers to complain at all touch-points
 9. Ensure all employees understand the complaints management process
 10. Reward customers who complain
 11. Collect complaints data and analyse root causes
 12. Implement technology to support complaints-handling and generate useful
  management reports
 Figure 7.13 
      Improving the 
complaints
management
process    

===== PAGE 236 =====
 
Creating value for customers 213
retention. An international standard, ISO 10002, has been released to help 
companies identify and implement best practice in complaints policy and 
process. Software is available to help companies improve their complaints-
handling expertise. 
36    Figure 7.13   details some ideas for improving 
complaints management processes.
    Value from people 
  Many companies claim that people are their key differentiators, and 
a major source of customer value. This is especially so in professional 
services such as counselling, consulting and coaching where people are 
the product. The UK-based home improvement retailer B & Q has also 
added value to the shopping experience by recruiting former building 
tradesmen such as carpenters, electricians and plumbers to help customers 
diagnose their problems and choose the right products in-store. Even in 
the high-tech arena, people can be regarded as strengths that deliver value 
to customers. Nortel, for example, claims: 
  ‘ At Nortel we believe that our people are our strength. Their 
knowledge, commitment and talents drive our success ’ .
   There are many important roles that need to be ﬁ lled for CRM to deliver 
its promise of enhanced customer retention and company proﬁ  tability. 
We examine these in greater detail in Chapter 17. 
  One of the more important jobs in CRM is the customer contact role. 
The customer contact role is a boundary-spanning role. That is, the 
role occupant sits in the space between an organization and its external 
customers. They are paid by the company, but work closely with 
customers. Boundary spanners have two fundamental and interdependent 
roles: information management and relationship management. Boundary 
spanners are accountable for collecting information about customers. What 
are the customer’s requirements, expectations and preferences? What are 
the customer’s future plans? Who is involved in the customer’s buying 
decisions? The boundary spanner may have responsibility for maintaining 
the accuracy of the customer data records. This information enables 
the role occupant to perform the second role, managing the customer 
relationship. This might involve winning, growing and maintaining 
the customer’s business, handling customer queries and complaints, 
representing the customer’s interests to his employer and ensuring the 
customer’s satisfaction. 
   There is a trend towards key account management that is driven by 
a number of trends: global customers, consolidated purchasing, vendor 
reduction programmes and customers who want better service and closer 
relationships with their suppliers. The role of key account manager, 
national account manager or global account manager is extremely 
important. Occupants need an advanced, and rare, skill, knowledge and 
attitude proﬁ le including selling skills, negotiating skills, communication 

===== PAGE 237 =====
 
214 Customer Relationship Management
skills, analytical skills, problem-solving skills, customer knowledge, 
market knowledge, competitor knowledge, customer orientation, as well 
as a detailed understanding of what their own company’s network can 
deliver.  
    Value from physical 
evidence
   Some companies create value for customers by managing physical 
evidence. This is especially important for service companies with 
intangible–dominant outputs. In the absence of physical evidence, 
customers may ﬁ nd it very hard to determine whether or not they are 
receiving value. Physical evidence can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 Physical evidence consists of the tangible facilities, equipment and 
materials that companies use to communicate value to customers. 
   Physical evidence includes a company’s premises and their internal and 
external environments, print materials, websites, corporate uniforms and 
vehicle livery. 
   It makes sense for companies to audit and create an inventory of 
the physical evidence that can inﬂ  uence customers ’  perceptions of 
value. Banks, for example, generally occupy traditional buildings with 
columns, porticoes, steps and large, heavy doors. This is designed to 
communicate conservative values, security and probity. McDonald’s 
uses primary colours, bright lights and the ubiquitous golden arches in 
the form of the letter ‘ M ’ . Hospitals convey impressions of good hygiene 
and care through white uniforms, immaculately clean premises and well-
maintained gardens. You only need to reﬂ  ect on the traditional clothing, 
livery and appearance of funeral services to understand the signiﬁ  cance 
of physical evidence. 
  Web portals also act as physical evidence. The only physical evidence 
that remotely located customers who don’t receive visits from sales 
representatives might have of a supplier is their web portal. Many 
companies have developed portals for their customers and partners. Users 
generally obtain access through a secure sign-on procedure and then have 
access to information relevant to their own role, for example as customer 
or partner. Managers of the portal can push information out to users on a 
segment or individual basis. Users can transact, communicate and enquire 
online in a secure environment. A web portal can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 A web portal is a website that serves as a gateway to a range of 
subject-related resources. 
   In addition to corporate portals, there are general consumer portals, such 
as Yahoo! ( www.yahoo.com ) and MSN ( www.msn.com ), and specialized 
or niche portals. There are many niche portals for special interest groups 
such as gardeners ( www.garden.com ), cricket fans ( www.cricinfo.com ), 

===== PAGE 238 =====
 
Creating value for customers 215
investors ( www.fool.com ) and chief executives ( www.ceoexpress.com ). 
Portals act as gateways to the rest of the Internet, and often include 
features such as search engines, directories, customizable homepages 
and e-mail. 
   General portals provide customer value by bringing together related 
content from different sources, providing convenient access for users. 
For example, the website www.buzgate.org  (see Figure 7.14   ) is a portal 
that provides access to a comprehensive array of online public and 
private sector resources for small- and medium-sized businesses (SMB). 
 Figure 7.14        Information availability online at  www.buzgate.org37     

===== PAGE 239 =====
 
216 Customer Relationship Management
Portals like these function in much the same way as a high street retailer, 
in that they act as repositories for many different products (resources). 
    Value from customer 
communication
   Companies are now able to create value for customers from 
communication practices that were impossible in earlier years. A 
signiﬁ cant change is that companies are now able to facilitate multilateral 
communication: company-to-customer, customer-to-company and even 
customer-to-customer. Traditionally customer communication has been 
one way: from companies to customers. The conventional tools for 
company-to-customer communication are unilateral: advertising, sales 
promotion, publicity, public relations and personal selling. With the 
exception of selling, these communication channels are non-interactive. 
Customer-company communication is enabled through e-mail, web 
forms, instant messaging, phone, fax, web collaboration, as well as 
old-fashioned correspondence. Companies can also facilitate customer-
to-customer (peer-to-peer) communication by web logs (better known as 
blogs), chat rooms, newsgroups and online communities. Collectively, 
these are known as customer generated media (CGM). Southwest 
Airlines, for example, has established a blog intended to ‘ give our 
readers the opportunity to take a look inside Southwest Airlines and to 
interact with us. This is as much your blog as it is ours. 
   Three processes are responsible for the enhanced power of 
communication to create value for customers: disintermediation, 
personalization and interactivity. 
    Disintermediation 
   Today, the development of new technologies has lead to the emergence 
of many direct-to-customer (DTC) communication tools including 
e-mail, direct mail and SMS messaging to cell-phones. Companies are 
now able to get their message direct to customers. Equally, customers 
can get their messages direct to companies and to other customers in the 
ways described above.  
    Personalization 
   High-quality customer-related data, CRM technologies and DTC 
channels, in combination, enable companies to tailor offers and 
communications to individual customers. This is what Don Peppers and 
Martha Rogers have called one-to-one marketing. 
38   Data on customers ’  
buying history and propensities-to-buy can be used to develop offers 
that meet with a much higher response rate and conversion rate than 
conventional mailings. The content, timing and delivery channels for 
communications can be based on customer preferences. 

===== PAGE 240 =====
 
Creating value for customers 217
  Another form of personalization is found online. CRM technologies are 
available that allow customers to personalize their own corporate web 
pages. Customers of www.lastminute.com  can personalize their home 
page (mylastminute.com) using technology that stores their preferences. 
This enables the company to reﬁ ne its messaging to the customer base. It 
claims to achieve click-through rates that are 30 per cent higher than non-
targeted messaging.  
39   You can also create your own daily newspaper at 
 www.ft.com , based on your personal interests and preferences. This can 
then be used as your homepage.
       Case 7.2   
  Customized communication at Mercedes-Benz      
   Mercedes-Benz decided to launch its new M-Class off-road vehicle in the USA knowing that 
it was already a crowded market. However, they accessed publicly available and corporate 
data to obtain details of all current owners of off-road and Mercedes vehicles. Mercedes 
then undertook a series of personalized direct mailings to the database, with the objective 
of raising awareness about the vehicle. The pretext for the communication was to ask for 
help in the process of designing the vehicle. There was an overwhelming response and the 
respondents were sent questionnaires which asked for guidance on design issues. 
   Two months later Mercedes pre-sold its ﬁ rst year sales target of 35  000 vehicles. It had been 
expecting to spend some US$70 million marketing the car, but by using this CRM-based 
approach it only needed to spend US$48 million, saving US$22 million. The programme was 
so successful that Mercedes is looking to use the same approach in the future with other 
model launches. 
   Personalization can also be performed on communications between 
customers and employees, such as customer service agents. For example, 
scripts can be tailored to enable agents unfamiliar with a product or 
customer segment to perform competently in telephone interactions. 
    Interactivity 
   Interactive technologies have been around since the advent of the 
telephone. Recently, the Internet has revolutionized the scope for 
interactivity through three major technologies: e-mail, instant messaging 
and the World Wide Web (WWW). E-mail enables customers and 
companies to interact effectively. For example, customers can e-mail for 
information that is unavailable on the frequently asked questions (FAQ) 
pages of corporate websites. E-mail gives customers access to a speciﬁ  c 
named person or work group, such as help@ or info@. Contact with 
a name gives customers the sense that there is an individual who is 
taking care of them. Instant messaging enables communications to take 
place in real-time, which is not always possible with e-mail. 
   The WWW is an Internet-enabled service that allows computer 
users to communicate globally with each other. A company can upload 
a website and anticipate huge reach. Websites come in a variety of 

===== PAGE 241 =====
 
218 Customer Relationship Management
forms: some are simply electronic brochures; others enable transactions 
to be made; another group of sites are highly interactive. Some excellent 
websites offer an experience similar to human dialogue. Conﬁ  guration 
engines allow the most appropriate products to be offered based on an 
analysis of the customer’s speciﬁ c needs. Problem resolution logic allows 
customers to ﬁ nd the best solution to a problem, and web chat windows 
allow human dialogue over the web, if all else fails. 
    Value from channels 
   The traditional task of the distribution function is to provide time and 
place utilities to customers. Effectively this means getting products and 
services to customers when and where they want. Consumer goods 
companies have usually constructed channels using intermediaries such 
as wholesalers and retailers. B2B companies usually sell direct or employ 
industrial distributors. The location of service providers may be critical 
or irrelevant to the creation of value for customers. Customers want their 
grocery retailers to be conveniently located, but don’t care where their 
Internet service provider is located. 
  An emerging task for intermediaries in the B2B environment is value 
augmentation. Channel partners in technology industries add services 
and complementary products that are not available from the core 
product manufacturer. The purchase of an ERP system, for example, may 
require implementation services, technical services, business process 
re-engineering, change management, customization of software or 
specialized hardware, such as radio frequency (RF) handheld units in the 
warehouse. Channel partners not only distribute the ERP product, they 
also provide or coordinate others to provide these additional products 
and services. 
   Internet-enabled disintermediation has allowed many companies 
to replace or supplement their traditional bricks-and-mortar channels. 
Many companies have elected to develop transactional websites so that 
they can sell direct. Others have developed brochureware sites that 
direct interested prospects to traditional channel members. One major 
beneﬁ t attached to this latter option is that it reduces the level of channel 
conﬂ ict that can be extremely high if an intermediary believes that 
a supplier is attempting to sell direct to the intermediaries ’  customers. 
Additional routes to market include: 
●      portal directories such as Yahoo! and Excite 
●      search engines such as AltaVista and Infoseek 
●      electronic shopping malls such as  www.eMall.sg  and  www.emallroad.
com
●      virtual resellers such as Amazon and CDNow. 40
   Customers may ﬁ nd that it is too costly and inefﬁ  cient to deal with a 
large number of potential disintermediated suppliers. This has created 

===== PAGE 242 =====
 
Creating value for customers 219
opportunities for reintermediation. Reintermediation adds an electronic 
intermediary to the distribution channel. Illustrations include: 
     www.netbuydirect.com  for a wide range of factory-direct products  
     www.lastminute.com  for holidays, ﬂ ights, accommodation, car hire and 
gifts
     www.laterooms.com  for discounted hotel rooms  
    www.moneyworld.com  for mortgages, credit cards, bank loans, insurances 
and pensions. 
   Ultimately, companies face four options when creating value for 
customers from electronic channels.  41
   1 .       No Internet sales : this might be the best option for small businesses 
with a local clientele. Companies on the Internet access an international 
audience. If they are unable to ﬁ ll the demand that might arise, they are 
perhaps better off using traditional channels. 
    2 .       Internet sales by reseller only  : a reseller, selling on behalf of many 
producers, may be big enough in terms of customer numbers and 
revenues to invest in online transactional capability. Fulﬁ  lment of 
orders may be performed by the reseller or producer.  
    3 .       Internet sales by producer only  : it would be unusual for a company 
selling through bricks-and-mortar channels to establish a web 
presence that is in direct competition to those channel members. This 
would generate signiﬁ cant channel conﬂ ict.  
    4 .       Internet sales by all : both reseller and producer sell online. 
   Which of these strategies will add value for customers depends upon 
whether customers enjoy additional time and place utility from online 
purchasing.
        Summary      
   This chapter has stressed the importance of creating value for customers. Value creation 
and delivery is a role for strategic CRM. Value can be thought of as the relationship 
between the beneﬁ  ts experienced from a product or service and the sacriﬁ  ces made 
to enjoy those beneﬁ  ts. Value is therefore enhanced when sacriﬁ  ces are reduced or 
beneﬁ ts increased. Three major types of sacriﬁ  ce have been identiﬁ  ed: money, search 
and psychic costs. Companies can offer improved value to customers by creating and 
delivering better solutions to customers ’  problems. 
   Researchers have identiﬁ  ed three major value delivery strategies that successful 
companies have adopted: operational excellence, product leadership and customer 
intimacy. Marketers are generally responsible for designing customer value propositions. 
Value propositions are constructed by mixing together a number of variables that will 

===== PAGE 243 =====
 
220 Customer Relationship Management
appeal to customers. These variables are known as the marketing 
mix. For goods manufacturers they comprise the 4Ps: product, 
price, promotion and place. In the services environment, the 
4Ps are supplemented by three additional Ps: process, physical 
evidence and people. In the B2B environment, value propositions 
have long been customized. Customization is now emerging as a 
powerful force in the B2C environment too. Any of the 7Cs can 
be customized. 
   Management can create additional value by their management 
of the 7Ps. For example, product innovation, branding and 
product–service bundling are ways to create additional value. 
Similarly, service quality improvement programmes, service 
guarantees, service level agreements and service recovery 
programmes may be seen as value adding. 
   The Internet, customer-related databases and CRM technologies 
are allowing companies to tailor their customer communication 
strategies at segment or, often, unique customer level. Messages 
can be communicated directly to customers, side-stepping the 
media long used for broadcast advertising. They can also be 
personalized, not only in the form of address, but also in content 
and timing. Unlike traditional media, the newer channels, 
including the Internet, are interactive. Companies can get instant 
feedback from their customers.       
  References  
       1.          Zeithaml ,    V .A.                ( 1988 )        Consumer perceptions of price, quality and 
value: a means-end model and synthesis of evidence .  Journal of 
Marketing       , Vol.  Vol. 52         , pp.  2  –       22      ,  July     .  
       2.          Gale ,    B.T.             ( 1994 )        Managing customer value: creating quality and service 
that customers can see             .  New York :       Free Press            ,  This book presents 
a view that quality and monetary price are the basis of value 
computation by customers. 
       3.          Sheth ,    J.N.  ,   Newman ,    B.I.   and   Gross ,    B.L.             ( 1991 )        Consumption Values 
and Market Choices: Theory and Applications             .  Cincinnati :       South-Western 
Publishing Company              .   
       4.          Gassenheimer ,    J.B.  ,   Houston ,    F.S.   and   Davis ,    J.C.                ( 1998 )        The role of 
economic value, social value, and perceptions of fairness in inter-
organizational relationship retention decisions . Journal of the Academy 
of Marketing Science       , Vol.  Vol. 26         , pp.  322  –       337      ,  (Fall)     .  
       5.          Easton ,    G.  ,   Burrell ,    G.  ,   Shearman ,    C.   and   Rothschild ,    R.             ( 1993 ) 
 Managers and competition             .  Oxford :       Blackwell              .  

===== PAGE 244 =====
 
Creating value for customers 221
       6.          Treacey ,    M.   and   Wiersema ,    F.             ( 1995 )        The discipline of market leaders             .  
 London :       Harper Collins              .  
       7.          McCarthy ,    E.J.             ( 1996 )        Basic Marketing          ,  12th edn.        Homewood, IL :       RD 
Irwin              .
       8.          Booms ,    B.H.   and   Bitner ,   M.-J.             ( 1981 )       Marketing strategies and 
organizational structures for service ﬁ  rms .        In:       J.     Donnelly   and   W.R.  
   George  (eds.)       .      Marketing of Services           .  Chicago :       American Marketing 
Association      , pp.  47  –       51        .  
       9.         The table is based on Piller, F.T., Moeslein, K. and Stotko, C.M. (2004) 
Does mass customization pay? An economic approach to evaluate 
customer integration. Production Planning and Control  , Vol. 15(4), pp. 
435–444.
      10.          Piller ,   F.T.   and   Müller ,    M.                ( 2004 )        A new marketing approach to 
mass customization .             International Journal of Computer Integrated 
Manufacturing       , Vol.  Vol. 17      ( 7 )       , pp.  583  –       593        .  
      11.         See, for example, Kotler, P . (2000)  Marketing management: the 
millennium edition  . Saddle River, HJ: Prentice Hall and Levitt, T. 
(1980) Marketing success – through differentiation of anything. 
Harvard Business Review , January–February, pp. 83–91. 
      12.          Levitt ,    T.             ( 1969 )        The marketing mode             .  New York :       McGraw-Hill            ,  p.2.     .  
      13.          Crosby ,    P .B.             ( 1979 )        Quality is free             .  New York :       McGraw-Hill              .  
      14.          Juran ,    J.M.             ( 1964 )        Managerial breakthrough             .  New York :       McGraw-Hill              .  
      15.          Grönroos ,    C.                ( 1984 )        A service quality model and its marketing 
implications .            European Journal of Marketing       , Vol.  Vol. 18         , pp.  36  –       44        .  
      16.          Grönroos ,    C.             ( 1984 )        Strategic Management and Marketing in the Service 
Sector            .  London :       Chartwell-Bratt Ltd.              .  
      17.         Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V .A. and Berry, L.L. (1985) A conceptual 
model of service quality and its implications for future research. 
Journal of Marketing  , Vol. 49, Fall, pp. 41–50; Parasuraman, A., 
Zeithaml, V .A. and Berry, L.L. (1988) SERVQUAL: a multiple-item 
scale for measuring consumers ’  perceptions of service quality.  Journal
of Retailing , Vol. 64(1), pp. 22–37; Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V .A. and 
Berry, L.L. (1991) Reﬁ  nement and reassessment of the SERVQUAL 
scale. Journal of Retailing  , Vol. 64, pp. 12–40; Parasuraman, A., 
Zeithaml, V .A. and Berry, L.L. (1994) Reassessment of expectations as 
a comparison standard in measuring service quality: implications for 
future research.  Journal of Marketing , Vol. 58(1), pp. 111–132.      
      18.          Parasuraman ,    A.  ,   Zeithaml ,    V .A.   and   Berry ,    L.L.                ( 1988 )        SERVQUAL: 
a multi-item scale for measuring consumer perceptions of service 
quality .            Journal of Retailing       , Vol.  Vol. 64         , pp.  12  –       40        .  
      19.         Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V .A. and Berry, L.L. (1988) SERVQUAL: a 
multiple-item scale for measuring consumers ’  perceptions of service 
quality.  Journal of Retailing  , Vol. 64(1), pp. 22–37; Parasuraman, A., 
Zeithaml, V .A. and Berry, L.L. (1991) Reﬁ  nement and reassessment 
of the SERVQUAL scale.  Journal of Retailing , Vol. 64, pp. 12–40. 
      20.         Buttle, F. (1996) SERVQUAL: review, critique and research agenda. 
European Journal of Marketing  , Vol. 30(1), pp. 8–32; Rust, R.T. (1995) 
Return on quality (ROQ): making service quality ﬁ  nancially 
accountable. Journal of Marketing , Vol. 59(2), April, pp. 58–71. 

===== PAGE 245 =====
 
222 Customer Relationship Management
      21.          Buttle ,    F.                ( 1996 )        SERVQUAL: review, critique and research agenda . 
European Journal of Marketing       , Vol.  Vol. 30      ( 1 )       , pp.  8  –       32        .  
      22.         Cronin, J.J. and Taylor, S.A. (1992) Measuring service quality: a re-
examination and extension. Journal of Marketing , Vol. 56, July, pp. 55–
68; Cronin, J. J and Taylor, S.A. (1994) SERVPERF versus SERVQUAL: 
reconciling performance-based and perceptions-minus expectations 
measurement of service quality.  Journal of Marketing , Vol. 58, January, 
pp. 125–131. 
      23.         Copyright © 2008. ADT Security Services, Inc., Boca Raton, FL, USA. 
Used with permission. 
      24.          http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/Aa996021.67ad4a0d-
8784–4988-be36-70b3a8a3dce2(en-us,TechNet.10).gif . Accessed 21 
January 2008. 
      25.          Keaveney ,    S.M.                ( 1995 )        Customer switching behaviour in service 
industries: an exploratory study .            Journal of Marketing       , Vol.  Vol. 59         , pp. 
 71  –       82      ,  (April)     .  
      26.          Tax ,    S.W.  ,   Brown ,    S.W.   and   Chandrashekaran ,    M.                ( 1998 )        Customer 
evaluations of service complaint experiences: implications for 
relationship marketing .  Journal of Marketing        , Vol.  Vol. 62         , pp.  60  –       76      , 
 April     .
      27.          Hart ,    C.W.  ,   Heskett ,    J.L.   and   Sasser ,    W.E.     Jr.                ( 1990 )        The proﬁ table art 
of service recovery .             Harvard Business Review       , Vol.  Vol. 68         , pp.  148  –       156      , 
 July–August     .
      28.          Tax ,    S.S.   and   Brown ,    S.W.                ( 1998 )        Recovering and learning from 
service failure .            Sloan Management Review       , Vol.  Fall         , pp.  75  –       88        .  
      29.          Sparks ,    B.   and   McColl-Kennedy ,    J.R.                ( 2001 )        Justice strategy options 
for increased customer satisfaction in a service recovery setting .
Journal of Business Research       , Vol.  Vol. 54         , pp.  209  –       218        .  
      30.          Davenport ,    T.H.             ( 1993 )        Process innovation: reengineering work through 
information technology             .  Boston, MA :       Harvard Business School Press              .  
      31.         Process engineering is a complex topic that is beyond the scope of 
this book. Interested readers can ﬁ  nd out more in Hammer, M. and 
Champy, J. (1993)  Re-engineeering the corporation  . New York: Harper 
Business; Davenport, T.H. (1993)  Process innovation: reengineering 
work through information technology  . Boston, MA: Harvard Business 
School Press; Keen, P .G.W. (1997)  The process edge: creating value where 
it counts . Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. 
      32.          Buttle ,    F.   and   Ang ,    L.                ( 2006 )        Customer retention management 
processes: a quantitative study .            European Journal of Marketing        , Vol. 
 Vol. 40      ( 1–2 )       , pp.  83  –       99        .  
      33.          Buttle ,    F.A.                ( 1998 )        Word-of-mouth: understanding and managing 
referral marketing .             Journal of Strategic Marketing        , Vol.  Vol. 6         , pp. 
 241  –       254        .
      34.          Richins ,    M.                ( 1983 )        Negative word-of-mouth by dissatisﬁ ed customers: 
a pilot study .             Journal of Marketing       , Vol.  Vol. 68         , pp.  105  –       111        . 
      35.         TARP . (1995) American Express – SOCAP study of complaint 
handling in Australia. Society of Consumer Affairs Professionals.      
      36.          http://www.listeningpost.com.au/Services/LPReviewcheckyour10
002conformance/tabid/57/Default.aspx . Accessed 11 October 2007. 

===== PAGE 246 =====
 
Creating value for customers 223
      37.           Courtesy of BUZGate.org™. BUZGate.org is a public service 
resource and referral network serving small business start-up, 
growth and sustainability by facilitating connections between 
public and private resource providers and resource users in a non-
commercial, educationally focused portal environment. 
      38.         Peppers, D. and Rogers, M. (1993)  The one-to-one future  . London: 
Piatkus; Peppers, D. and Rogers, M. (1997) Enterprise one-to-one 
(1997) . London: Piatkus; Peppers, D., Rogers, M. and Dorf, B. (1999) 
The one-to-one ﬁ eldbook . Oxford: Capstone; Peppers, D. and Rogers, 
M. (2000) The one-to-one manager . Oxford: Capstone. 
      39.          Lastminute.com . (2001) Annual report.      
      40.          Sarkar ,    M.  ,   Butler ,    B.   and   Steinfeld ,    C.                ( 1996 )        Exploiting the virtual 
value chain .             Journal of Computer Mediated Communication       , Vol.  Vol. 1      ( 3 )               . 
      41.         Kumar, N. (1999) Internet distribution strategies: dilemmas for the 
incumbent. Financial Times , special issue on mastering information 
management, 7. www.ftmastering.com              

===== PAGE 247 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 248 =====
 
              Managing the customer 
lifecycle: customer 
acquisition
 Chapter 8 

===== PAGE 249 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 250 =====
 
           Chapter objectives      
   By the end of this chapter, you will understand: 
    1.   the meaning of the terms  ‘ customer lifecycle ’  and  ‘ new customer ’   
    2.   the strategies that can be used to recruit new customers  
    3.   how companies can decide which potential customers to target  
    4.   how to communicate with potential customers  
    5.   what offers can be made to attract new customers.         
    Introduction 
  Over this and the next chapter you will be introduced to the idea of 
a customer lifecycle and its management. The core customer lifecycle 
management processes are the customer acquisition, customer 
development and customer retention processes. These three processes 
determine how companies identify and acquire new customers, grow their 
value to the business and retain them for the long term. We also review the 
key metrics or key performance indicators (KPIs) which companies can 
use to assess their customer lifecycle performance. We examine customer 
development and retention processes in the next chapter. 
   In this chapter you will learn about the important issue of customer 
acquisition, the ﬁ rst stage of the customer lifecycle. New customers have 
to be acquired to build companies. Even in well-managed companies 
there can be a signiﬁ cant level of customer attrition. These lost customers 
need to be replaced. We look at several important matters for CRM 
practitioners: which potential new customers to target, how to approach 
them and what to offer them. 
   Customer lifecycles are presented in different ways by different 
authorities, but basically they all attempt to do the same thing. They 
attempt to depict the development of a customer relationship over time. 
Because we are taking a management view of customer relationships, 
we have collapsed the customer lifecycle into three major management 
activities:
●      acquiring new customers 
●      retaining existing customers 
●      developing customer value. 
   The ﬁ rst task in managing the customer lifecycle is to acquire customers. 
Customer retention is a pointless exercise if there are no customers to 
retain. Customer acquisition is always the most important goal during 
new product launches and with new business start-ups. For small 
businesses with ambitions to grow, customer acquisition is often as 
important as customer retention. A one-customer company, such as 

===== PAGE 251 =====
 
228 Customer Relationship Management
BICC, which supplies copper cable to a single customer, British Telecom 
(BT), can double its customer base by acquiring one more customer. On 
the other hand, the loss of that single customer could spell bankruptcy. 
  Even with well-developed and implemented customer retention 
plans, customers still need replacing, sometimes at a rate of 25 per cent 
or more a year. In a B2C context, customers may shift out of a targeted 
demographic as they age and progress through the family lifecycle; their 
personal circumstances may change and they may no longer need or 
ﬁ nd value in your product; they may even die. In a B2B context, you may 
lose corporate customers because they have been acquired by another 
company with established buying practices and supplier preferences; 
they may have stopped producing the goods and services for which your 
company provided input; they may have ceased trading. Customers lost 
to these uncontrollable causes indicate that customer acquisition will 
always be needed to replace natural attrition. 
   Several important questions have to be answered when a company 
puts together a customer acquisition plan. These questions concern 
targets, channels and offers: 
    1.     Which prospects (potential new customers) will be targeted? 
    2.     How will these prospects be approached? 
    3.     What offer will be made? 
   These issues need to be carefully considered and programmed into a 
properly resourced customer acquisition plan. Most marketing plans do 
not distinguish between customer acquisition and customer retention. 
They are not separately funded or plotted strategies. We recommend that 
companies think about these as separate but related issues, and develop 
appropriate strategies.  
    What is a new customer? 
   A customer can be new in one of two senses: 
    1.     new to the product category  
    2.     new to the company. 
    New-to-category 
   New-to-category customers are customers who have either identiﬁ  ed 
a new need or have found a new category of solution for an existing 
need. Consider the B2C context. When a couple has their ﬁ  rst child 
they have a completely new set of needs connected to the growth and 
nurturing of their child. This includes baby clothes, food and toys, for 
example. As the child grows, the parents are faced with additional new-
to-category decisions, such as preschool and elementary education. 
Sometimes, customers also become new-to-category because they ﬁ  nd 
a new category to replace an existing solution. Mobile phones have 

===== PAGE 252 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer acquisition 229
now signiﬁ cantly replaced card or cash-operated pay-phones in many 
countries. Environmentally friendlier detergents and diapers are growing 
their share of market, as customers switch from current products. 
  Sometimes, customers beat marketers to the punch by adopting 
established products for new uses. Marketers then catch on and begin 
to promote the new use. Arm and Hammer baking soda was used by 
customers to deodorize fridges and rubbish bins, and as a mild abrasive 
for whitening teeth. The manufacturer, Church and Dwight, responded 
to this revelation and began promoting a variety of different applications. 
It is now an ingredient in toothpaste. Their website,  www.armhammer.
com , provides visitors with many other tips for baking soda applications 
including cleaning, deodorizing, personal care and baking. The website 
encourages visitors to write in describing novel applications for the 
product. Automobile manufacturers noticed that many utility vehicles 
were not being bought by tradesmen, but as fun vehicles for weekend use. 
They began promoting this use, while at the same time trying to innovate 
in product design to meet the requirements of that market segment. The 
result has been the emergence of a completely new market segment: 
the market for sports utility vehicles (SUVs). Several websites serve this 
market, for example, www.suvoa.com , the site for Sports Utility Vehicle 
Owners of America. 
   The same distinction between new needs and new solutions also 
exists in the B2B marketplace. A customer can be new-to-category if they 
begin an activity that requires resources that are new to the business. 
For example, when McDonald’s entered the coffee shop market, they 
needed to develop a new set of supplier relationships. New-to-category 
customers may also be customers who ﬁ nd a new solution for an existing 
problem. For example, some clothing manufacturers now use computer-
operated sewing machines to perform tasks that were previously 
performed by skilled labour using traditional sewing machines.  
    New-to-company 
   The second category of new customers is customers that are new to 
the company. New-to-company customers are won from competitors. 
They might switch to your company because they feel you offer a better 
solution or because they value variety. Generally, new-to-company 
customers are the only option for growing customer numbers in mature 
markets where there are very few new-to-category customers. In 
developed economies, new players in grocery retail can only succeed by 
winning customers from established operators. They would not expect to 
convert those customers completely, but to win a share of their spending 
by offering better value in one or more important categories. Once the 
customer is in-store, the retailer will use merchandising techniques such 
as point-of-sale signs and displays to increase spending. 
   New-to-category customers may or may not be expensive to recruit. 
For example, when children leave home for university banks compete 
vigorously for their patronage. They advertise heavily in mass media, 
communicate direct to students, offer free gifts and low or zero-
cost banking for the duration of the studentship. On the other hand, 

===== PAGE 253 =====
 
230 Customer Relationship Management
supermarket retailers incur no direct costs in attracting these same 
students to their local stores. 
   New-to-company customers can be very expensive to acquire, 
particularly if they are strongly committed to their current supplier. 
Commitment is reﬂ ected in a strong positive attitude to, or high levels of 
investment in, the current supplier. These both represent high switching 
costs. A powerful commitment to a current supplier can be difﬁ cult, and 
often too expensive, to break. High potential value customers are not 
always the most attractive prospects, because of this commitment and 
investment. A lower value customer with a weaker commitment to the 
current supplier may be a better prospect.  
    Portfolio purchasing 
  New customers can be difﬁ  cult to identify in markets where customers 
exhibit portfolio purchasing behaviours. Customers buy on a portfolio 
basis when they buy from a choice set of several more or less equivalent 
alternatives. A customer who has not bought from one of the portfolio 
suppliers for a matter of months, or even years, may still regard the 
unchosen supplier as part of the portfolio. The supplier, on the other hand, 
may have a business rule that says:  ‘ If a customer has not bought for three 
months, mail out a special offer ’ . In the UK many grocery customers shop 
at both Tesco and Sainsbury’s. These retailers do not simply compete to 
acquire and retain customers. Instead they compete for a larger share of 
the customer’s spending, that is, to grow share of wallet (SOW). 
    Strategic switching 
  You may encounter evidence of strategic switching by customers. These 
are customers who shift their allegiances from one supplier to another 
in pursuit of a better deal. Banks know that their promotional pricing 
stimulates hot money. This is money that is moved from account to 
account across the banking industry in search of a better rate of interest. 
Sometimes the money may only be in an account overnight. 
   MCI, the telecoms company, discovered that about 70 per cent of 
customers newly acquired from competitors stayed for four months or 
less. These customers had been acquired when MCI mailed a cheque 
valued at $25, $75 or more to competitors ’  customers. When the cheque 
was banked, this automatically triggered the transfer of service to MCI. 
A few months later these customers again switched suppliers when 
another deal was offered and the cheque was already cashed. MCI 
ﬁ xed the problem by adjusting the promotion. Instead of mailing an 
immediately cashable cheque, its promotion was relaunched as a  ‘ staged 
rebate ’  promotion. The accounts of new customers who stayed for three, 
nine and 13 months were credited with sums equivalent to the cheque 
value that would previously have been sent.  
1
  Sometimes, a customer may have been regained a second or further time 
as a new customer. For example, if the new parents mentioned previously 
were to have a second child after four years, they would most likely have 
been removed from mother and baby databases. A new customer record 

===== PAGE 254 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer acquisition 231
would have to be created. The customer would need to be targeted afresh. 
In portfolio markets, a customer who has not purchased in quarter 1 may 
be treated as a new customer for promotional purposes in quarter 2, as the 
company attempts to reactivate the customer. 
    Customer value estimates 
  Companies must choose which of several potential customers or 
customer segments to target for acquisition. Not all prospects have similar 
potential. The ﬁ nal choice will depend on a number of considerations. 
    1.     What is the estimated value of the customer? This depends on the 
margins earned from the customer’s purchases over a given time 
period.
   2.     If that customer switches from his current supplier(s), what proportion 
of category spending will your company earn? 
    3.     What is the probability that the customer will switch from current 
supplier(s)?
   Imagine a competitor’s customer who will spend $5000, $6000, $7000 
and $8000 with that supplier over the next four years at gross margins of 
40 per cent. Without discounting those future margins, the customer is 
worth $10400 ($2000      /H11001      $2400      /H11001      $2800      /H11001      $3200). Let’s assume that your 
intelligence, based on customer satisfaction and loyalty scores, suggests 
that you have a 40 per cent chance of converting the customer and 
that, once converted, you will win a 50 per cent share of the customer’s 
available spending in that category. 
  The value of this customer can now be computed as follows: gross 
margins, multiplied by share of the customer’s spending, multiplied by 
the probability of winning the customer’s business. Using the numbers 
above, this customer is worth $10  400      /H11003      0.50      /H11003      0.40 or $2080. The question 
now becomes: can you recruit this customer and maintain a relationship 
over the next four years for less than $2080? If you can, then the customer 
will make a net contribution to your business. This simple algorithm 
allows you to compare different customer acquisition opportunities. 
Other things being equal, a customer that shows a higher potential 
contribution is a better prospect. The approach can be adjusted customer 
by customer and can take account of a number of additional factors such 
as: discounting future margins, producing differently costed approaches 
to customer acquisition, re-estimating future margins to take account 
of cross-selling opportunities, and estimating the annualized costs of 
customer retention. 
    The Conversion Model ™  
  Jan Hofmeyr has developed the Conversion Model ™ . This contains a 
battery of questions designed to assess whether or not a customer is likely 
to switch. His basic premise is that customers who are not committed are 

===== PAGE 255 =====
 
232 Customer Relationship Management
more likely to be available to switch to another provider. Commitment, 
in turn, is a function of satisfaction with the brand or offer, attractiveness 
of the alternatives and involvement in the brand or offer. Involvement 
is low if the product or its usage context is relatively unimportant to 
customers. The Conversion Model ™  allows customers to be segmented 
into four subsets according to their level of commitment: entrenched, 
average, shallow or convertible. There are two clusters of committed 
customers and two of uncommitted customers: 
●       committed customers
       –         entrenched  customers are unlikely to switch in the foreseeable 
future  
       –         average  customers are unlikely to change in the short term, but may 
switch in the medium term. 
●       uncommitted customers
       –         shallow  customers have a lower commitment than average, and 
some of them are already considering alternatives  
       –        convertible  customers are most likely to defect. 
   Hofmeyr suggest that companies can measure customer commitment by 
asking just four questions: 
    1.     How happy are you with (whatever it is)? 
    2.     Is this relationship something that you care about? 
    3.     Is there any other (whatever it is) that appeals to you?  
    4.     If so, how different is the one (whatever) from the other?    
   Non-customers are also segmented according to commitment scores into 
four availability subsets: available, ambivalent, weakly unavailable and 
strongly unavailable. There are two clusters that are open and two that 
are unavailable: 
●       open non-customers
       –         available  non-customers prefer the alternative to their current offer 
though they have not yet switched, and are ready to switch  
       –         ambivalent  non-customers are as attracted to the alternative as they 
are to their current brand. 
●       unavailable non-customers
       –        weakly unavailable  non-customers prefer their current brands  
       –         strongly unavailable   non-customers have a strong preference for 
their current brands. 
   Hofmeyr claims that these proﬁ les can be used to guide both acquisition 
and retention strategies. 2   He suggests that where the number of open 
non-customers is greater than the number of uncommitted customers, 
companies should focus strongly on customer acquisition. 
   Companies need to nurture their relationships with committed 
customers, reassuring them that their decision is wise, and ﬁ  nd ways 
to enrich and enhance their customers ’  experience. The strategy for 
uncommitted customers is to investigate why there is a low level of 

===== PAGE 256 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer acquisition 233
commitment and address the causes. Maybe it is a low-involvement 
category, or maybe customers are dissatisﬁ  ed with their experience. 
Whether companies should appeal to open non-customers depends upon 
the value they can generate. Finally there are many potential reasons 
why some market segments are composed of unavailable non-customers. 
They may have tried your offer, and didn’t ﬁ  nd it satisfying, they may 
be committed to their current brand or supplier, they may be aware of 
your offer but ﬁ  nd it unappealing, or they may simply be unaware of 
your offer. You might be able to ﬁ x this last problem with advertising or 
other forms of customer communication, shifting these non-customers 
from the unavailable cluster to the open cluster. Customer experience 
research might reveal what customers do not like about your offer or 
doing business with you, and give you some clues about how to make 
their experience more satisfying. 
  A core principle of CRM is that market or customer-related data is 
used to target acquisition efforts accurately. By contrast, poorly targeted 
acquisition efforts waste marketing budget and may alienate more 
prospects than they gain through irrelevant or inappropriate messaging. 
We now turn to the practice of new customer prospecting.   
    Prospecting 
   Prospecting is, of course, a mining term. In that context it means 
searching an area thought likely to yield a valuable mineral deposit. 
In CRM, it means searching for opportunities that might generate 
additional value for the company. 
   Prospecting is an outcome of the segmenting and targeting process 
described in Chapter 5. Prospects are endproducts of that process. 
Segmentation divides a heterogenous market into homogenous subsets, 
even down to the level of the unique customer. Targeting is the process 
of choosing which market segments, clusters or individuals, to approach 
with an offer. In Chapter 5, we identiﬁ  ed several characteristics of the 
strategically signiﬁ  cant customer that companies would ﬁ  nd most 
attractive in a prospect. We’ll now look at prospecting from the business-
to-business perspective. 
    Business-to-business prospecting 
   In the B2B environment it is very often the task of marketers to 
generate leads for the salesperson to follow up. Leads are individuals 
or companies that might be worth approaching. The lead then needs 
to be qualiﬁ ed. The qualiﬁ cation process submits all leads to a series of 
questions, such as: 
●      Does the lead have a need for my company’s products?  
●      Does the lead have the ability to pay?  
●      Is the lead authorized to buy? 

===== PAGE 257 =====
 
234 Customer Relationship Management
  If the answers are yes, yes and yes, the lead becomes a genuine 
prospect. Ability to pay covers both cash and credit. The ability to pay 
of prospective customers can be assessed by subscribing to credit rating 
services, such as Dun &  Bradstreet or Standard  &  Poor’s. Being a well-
known name is no guarantee that a prospect is credit-worthy, as suppliers 
to Enron Corporation found out. Enron was one of the world’s leading 
energy companies, employing 21 000 people, before it became bankrupt 
in 2001. Authority to buy may be invested in a named individual, 
a decision-making unit composed of a group of employees, a group 
composed of internal employees and external advisor(s) or, in some 
rare cases, an external individual or group. Andersen Consulting (now 
Accenture) was appointed by Chrysler to act as systems integrator for 
a new robotics system. Recommendations were developed by Andersen 
employees only, but Chrysler retained the power to veto any choice. 
   Once leads are qualiﬁ ed, companies need to decide the best channels 
for initiating contact. A distinction can be made between direct to 
customer (DTC) channels, such as salespeople, direct mail, e-mail and 
telemarketing, and channels that are indirect, either because they use 
partners or other intermediaries or because they use bought time and 
space in media. The improved quality of databases has meant that direct 
channels allow access to speciﬁ c named leads in target businesses. 
    Sources of B2B leads 
  Leads come from a variety of sources. In a B2B context this includes the 
sources identiﬁ ed in  Figure 8.1   . Many companies are turning to satisﬁ ed 
customers who may be willing to generate personal referrals. Customer-
related data enables many companies to identify which customers 
are very satisﬁ  ed. These special customers can then be proactively 
approached for a referral. They may be prepared to write a letter or 
e-mail of introduction, provide a testimonial or receive a call to verify the 
credentials of a salesperson. 
Satisfied customers
– Referrals from satisfied customers
Networking
– Personal contacts with well-connected and co-operative people
Promotional activities
– Exhibitions, seminars, tradeshows and conferences
  Delegate and attendee lists
– Advertising response inquiries
– Publicity
Websites
Lists and directories
– SIC listings, telephone directories
Canvassing
Tele-marketing
E-mail
 Figure 8.1 
      Sources of business-
to-business leads    

===== PAGE 258 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer acquisition 235
   Networking can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 Networking is the process of establishing and maintaining business-
related personal relationships.   
  A network might include members of a business association, friends 
from university or professional colleagues in other companies. In some 
countries it is essential to build and maintain personal networks. In 
China, for example, the practice of guanxi, covered in Chapter 2, means 
that it is well nigh impossible to do business without some personal 
connections already in place. 
   Referral networks are common in professional services. Accountants, 
banks, lawyers, auditors, tax consultants, estate agents will join together 
into a referral network in which they undertake to refer clients to other 
members of the network. 
   Promotional activities can also generate useful leads. Exhibitions, 
seminars, trade shows and conferences can be productive sources. 
Companies that pay to participate in these events may either be able to 
obtain privileged access to delegate and attendee lists, or to generate lists 
of their own, such as a list of visitors to their own stand at a trade show. 
   B2B marketers generally do little advertising, even though this can 
generate leads. B2B advertising is generally placed in highly-targeted 
specialist media such as trade magazines. 
  An important activity for some B2B companies is publicity. Publicity is 
an outcome of public relations (PR) activity. Publicity can be deﬁ  ned as 
follows:
 Publicity is the generation of free editorial content relevant to a 
company’s interests. 
   Successful PR can generate publicity for your product or company in 
appropriate media. This coverage, unlike advertising, is unpaid. Though 
unpaid, publicity does create costs. Someone has to be paid to write the 
story and submit it to the media. Many magazines, trade papers and 
online communities are run on a shoestring. They employ very few staff 
and rely heavily on stories submitted by companies and their PR staff 
to generate editorial matter. Editors are looking for newsworthy items, 
such as stories about product innovation, original customer applications 
or human-interest stories about inventors and entrepreneurs. Editorial 
staff generally will edit copy to eliminate deceptive or brazen claims. 
    Prospecting on the Internet 
  Company websites can also be fruitful sources of new customers. Anyone 
with access to the Internet is a prospective customer. The Internet enables 
potential customers to search globally for products and suppliers. To be 
effective in new customer generation, websites must take into account the 
way prospects search for information. There are four main ways: 3
    1.     keying in a page’s URL 
    2.     using search engines 

===== PAGE 259 =====
 
236 Customer Relationship Management
    3.     exploring directories, web catalogues or portals 
    4.     surﬁ ng.    
  A URL is a website address. URL stands for uniform (or universal) 
resource locator. By typing it into a web browser’s address window, you 
move straight to the website. Even if you didn’t know IBMs URL you 
could reasonably guess that it is  www.ibm.com . URLs can be saved as 
favourites once you are sure of the address. 
   Search engines provide an indexed guide to websites. Users searching 
for information type keywords into a web-based form. The engine then 
reports the number of hits, that is, webpages that feature the keyed 
word or words. Users can then click on a hyperlink to take them to 
the relevant pages. To ensure that your site is hit when a prospect is 
searching, your website needs to be registered with appropriate search 
engines. There are hundreds of search engines, but among the most well-
known are Google, Infoseek, Netscape, Webcrawler, AltaVista and Lycos. 
Sites such as www.searchenginewatch.com  offer tips of how to beneﬁ  t 
from website registration. There are also meta search engines. These are 
engines that search for keywords on other search engines. Among them 
are  www.metacrawler.com  and  www.37.com  which lets users search 
through 37 other search engines. 
   Directories or web catalogues such as Yahoo! provide a structured 
hierarchical listing of websites, grouped into categories such as business, 
entertainment and sport. Companies choose under which category to 
register. For example, Rolls Royce aero engine division ( www.rolls-royce.
com ) and four other manufacturers can be accessed from Business_
and_Economy /H11022  Business_to_Business      /H11022      Aerospace_and_Defense      /H11022      
Engines      /H11022      Manufacturers on the Yahoo! directory. 
  Portals, which were introduced in Chapter 7, are websites that act as 
gateways to the rest of the Internet. Portals tend to be focused on particular 
industries or user groups and offer facilities such as search engines, 
directories, customizable home pages and e-mail. For example, the portal 
 www.CEOExpress.com  provides a wealth of information and access to 
other sites that may be of use to busy Chief Executives ( Figure 8.2   ) .  
   Surﬁ ng is a term used to describe a more intuitive and less structured 
approach to website searching. 
   When prospective customers reach your site they need to be able to 
do what they want. This may mean searching for a product, registering 
for information (effectively enabling permission-based prospecting by 
supplying their name, alias or e-mail address), requesting a quotation, 
describing their requirements and preferences. 
   Lists of prospects can be developed from many sources such as 
telephone directories, business lists, chamber of commerce memberships, 
professional and trade association memberships, and magazine 
circulation data. Lists can also be bought readymade from list compilers 
and brokers. Lists of prospects, organized by their Standard Industrial 
Classiﬁ cation code are widely used (see Chapter 5 for more detail). Some 
lists are of poor quality: out-of-date, containing duplications, omissions, 
and other errors. High quality lists with full contact details, including 
phone and e-mail address tend to be more expensive. Lists can support 
direct marketing efforts by phone, mail, e-mail, fax or face-to-face. 

===== PAGE 260 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer acquisition 237
   Canvassing involves making unsolicited calls, sometimes known 
as cold calls. This can be a very wasteful use of an expensive asset: the 
salesperson. Some companies have banned their salespeople from cold 
calling. Others outsource this activity to third parties. Some hotel chains, 
for example, use hospitality students to conduct a sales blitz that is 
essentially a telephone-based cold calling campaign. 
  Telemarketing is widely used as a more cost-effective way of 
prospecting than use of a salesperson. Telemarketing, sometimes called 
telesales, is a systematic approach to prospecting using the telephone, and, 
sometimes, other electronic media such as fax and e-mail. Telemarketing 
is usually performed by staff of customer contact centres. These are either 
in-house or outsourced. Outbound telemarketers make outgoing calls 
to identify and qualify leads. Inbound telemarketers receive calls from 
prospective customers. In addition to prospecting, telemarketing can 
be used to manage other parts of the customer lifecycle: cross-selling, 
handling complaints and winning back at-risk or lost customers, for 
example. 
  A growing number of companies are using e-mail for new customer 
acquisition. E-mail offers several clear advantages. A very large proportion 
of business decision makers have e-mail, although this does vary by 
country and industry. It is very cheap, costing about the same to send 
one thousand e-mails as it does to send a single e-mail. It is quick and 
simple for recipients to respond. Content can be personalized. Production 
values can be matched to audience preferences: you can use richly 
graphical or simple textual content. It is an asynchronous prospecting 
tool, in other words it is not tied to a particular timeframe like a sales call. 
 Figure 8.2        The portal CEOExpress    

===== PAGE 261 =====
 
238 Customer Relationship Management
E-mail messages sit in mailboxes until they are read or deleted. It is a very 
ﬂ exible tool that can be linked to telesales follow-up,  ‘ call-me ’  buttons or 
click-throughs. 
  When e-mail is permission-based, response rates can be extraordinarily 
high.4   However, there is growing resistance to spam e-mail. E-mails are 
spammed when they are sent to large numbers of recipients who have not 
been properly screened. What is spam to one recipient may be valuable 
information to another. An important ingredient in e-mail marketing is 
a process by which prospects are encouraged or incentivized to provide 
e-mail addresses for future contact. We examine both telemarketing and 
e-mail campaigning in greater detail in Chapter 15. 
    Business-to-consumer prospecting 
   In B2C contexts, the distribution of customer acquisition effort is 
different. More emphasis is put on advertising, sales promotion, buzz or 
word-of-mouth and merchandising. However, all of the techniques you 
have just read about are also used, but generally in a different way. We’ll 
turn to them later. First, we’ll look at advertising. 
    Advertising 
  Advertising is used as a prime method for generating new customers in 
B2C environments. It can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
  Advertising is the creation and delivery of messages to targeted 
audiences through the purchase of time or space in media owned 
by others. 
  Advertising can be successful at achieving two different classes of 
communication objective: cognitive and affective. Cognition is concerned 
with what audiences know; affect is concerned with what they feel. 
Advertising alone is often insufﬁ cient to generate behavioural outcomes, 
such as trial purchasing. It can, however, predispose audiences to make 
an intention-to-buy based on what they learned about and felt towards 
the advertised product. 
   Cognitive advertising objectives include: raising awareness, 
developing understanding, and generating knowledge. New customers 
generally need to be made aware of the product and to understand 
what beneﬁ ts it can deliver. Affective advertising objectives include 
developing a liking for the product and generating preference. 
   In high involvement purchasing contexts, where products or their 
usage context are personally signiﬁ  cant and relevant, prospects will 
normally progress through a learn–feel–do process when making their 
ﬁ rst purchase. In other words, before they buy they acquire information 
that helps them learn about and compare alternatives, thus reducing 
perceived risk. They then develop a preference for, and intention to 
buy, a particular offer. Customers are essentially conducting a complex 
problem-solving process. Advertising is one of the sources they can use 
in the learn–feel part of that process. It is, however, not the only source 
of information, nor is it necessarily the most powerful. 

===== PAGE 262 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer acquisition 239
  High-involvement advertising can employ long copy because prospects 
use advertising to learn about alternatives. Comparison advertising and 
copy featuring endorsements by opinion formers may be inﬂ  uential. 
Media that help prospects to acquire and process information are those 
that have a long dwell-time, such as magazines and newspapers. 
  Advertising can also evoke powerful emotional responses in audiences. 
The type of response that advertisers seek in prospects is  ‘ I like the 
look of that. I really must try it ’ . This is an affective response linked to 
a buying intention. Advertisements for fashion items, jewellery and 
vacation destinations often aim for an emotional response. Television 
advertisements evoke emotions by their clever mix of voice, music, 
images and sound effects. Advertisers can pre-test different executions to 
ensure that the right sort of emotional response is evoked. 
   In low-involvement contexts, where the product category or its usage 
context is relatively unimportant, prospects are very unlikely to go 
through a complex and demanding learn–feel–do process. Rather, there 
will be little or no prepurchase comparison of alternatives. The prospect 
is much more likely to simply become aware of the product and buy 
it. There may not even be a postpurchase evaluation of the experience, 
except in the most elementary of forms. Post-purchase evaluation may 
only take place if the product fails to deliver the beneﬁ  ts expected. The 
purchase model is therefore learn–do. The role of advertising for low-
involvement products is to build and maintain brand awareness and 
recognition. Copy needs to be kept short: prospects won’t read long 
advertising copy. Recognition can be achieved with the use of simple 
visual cues. Repetition of the ad in low involvement media such as 
television and radio will be needed to build awareness and recognition. 
  Advertisers are concerned with two major issues as they attempt to 
generate new customers: message and media issues. Which messages 
will generate most new customers, and which media are most cost-
effective at customer acquisition?  
    Message 
  Although precise measurement has not been conducted, it has been 
suggested that heavy media users are exposed to over one thousand 
advertisements per week. 5   Yet how many can a person recall? In an 
increasingly communicated world, it is a ﬁ  rst requirement that an 
advertisement must stand out from the background clutter and claim 
the audience’s attention. Advertisers call this  ‘ cut-through ’ . Without 
it, no cognitive, affective or behavioural outcomes can be achieved. 
An advertisement that stands out is one that differs from the many 
advertisements and other stimuli that compete for the prospect’s 
attention.  ‘ Standing out ’  is a matter of message creativity, execution and 
media selection. What stands out? Here are some examples: 
●      black and white advertisements in colour magazines  
●      image-based advertisements in text-dominated media 
●      loud advertisements in quiet media 
●      advertisements that leave you wondering  ‘ what was that all about? ’
●      advertisements that challenge your comprehension and emotions. 

===== PAGE 263 =====
 
240 Customer Relationship Management
  Message execution is an important issue in gaining an audience’s 
attention. Messages can be executed in many different ways. Execution 
describes the way in which a basic copy strategy is delivered. Basic copy 
strategy is the core message or theme of the campaign. Execution styles 
can be classiﬁ ed in a number of ways: rational or emotional, factual or 
fanciful, funny or serious. Individual forms of execution include slice of 
life (product being used in a recognizable context), aspirational (associates 
the product with a desirable outcome or lifestyle), testimonial (the product 
is endorsed by an opinion inﬂ uencer), and comparative (the advertisement 
compares one or more alternatives with the advertised product). 
  Advertisements often close with a  ‘ call to action ’ , such as a suggestion 
that the audience clip a coupon, call a number or register online. These 
actions generate useful sources of prospects that can then be followed up. 
   Pre-testing messages on a sample of potential new customers is a way 
to improve the chances of an ad achieving its objectives. Among the 
criteria you can assess are the following: 
●       recall:  how much of the advertisement can the sample recall?  
●       comprehension:  does the sample understand the advertisement?  
●       credibility:  is the message believable?  
●       feelings evoked:  how does the sample feel about the advertisement?  
●       intention to buy:  how likely is it that the sample will buy? 
   If you buy space or time in media that have local or regional editions, 
you can conduct post-tests to assess the effectiveness of different 
executions in achieving the desired outcomes.  
    Media 
  Media selection for new customer acquisition is sometimes quite 
straightforward. For example, there are print publications such as  What 
Digital Camera?  and  Which Mortgage? that are targeted speciﬁ cally at new-
to-category prospects and are suitable for high-involvement products. An 
uninvolved prospect will only learn passively about your product because 
there is no active search for and processing of information. Consequently, 
for low involvement prospects, frequency is a more important media 
consideration than reach. These are deﬁ ned as follows: 
reach is the total number of a targeted audience that is exposed at 
least once to a particular advertisement or campaign
frequency is the average number of times that a targeted audience 
member is exposed to an advertisement or campaign.
   The total number of exposures is therefore computed by multiplying 
reach by frequency. If your advertisement reaches two million people an 
average of four times, the total number of impressions or exposures is 
eight million. For high-involvement products lower levels of frequency 
are generally sufﬁ  cient. Advertising agencies should be able to offer 
advice on how many exposures (frequency) it takes to evoke a particular 
response in an audience member.  
6
  You can compute various media efﬁ ciency statistics to help you get 
better value for money from your customer acquisition budget. These 
include response rates and conversion rates. 

===== PAGE 264 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer acquisition 241
   Response rates provide a ﬁ  rst-level indicator of advertisement 
effectiveness. Examples include the number of coupons clipped and 
returned or calls requesting information (RFI) made to a contact centre. 
Conversion rates offer a second-level indicator of advertisement 
effectiveness. Examples include sales made as a percentage of coupons 
returned or proposals submitted as a percentage of RFIs. 
    Table 8.1    gives you an idea of the types of statistics that can be used 
to evaluate and guide customer acquisition strategies. The table contains 
a number of descriptive and analytical statistics for four different print 
advertising vehicles: cost-per-thousand (column 5: how may dollars 
does it cost to reach 1000 of the advertising vehicle’s audience), coupons 
returned, coupons returned as a percentage of audience reached, orders 
received from new customers, coupon conversion rate, total order 
value received, average order value and advertising effectiveness ratio 
(column 12: how many dollars of orders were received per dollar spent 
on advertising in the vehicle). 
   The Daily News is most cost-efﬁ  cient at delivering an audience since 
its cost-per-thousand (CPM) is lowest (column 5). The Supermarket 
Tabloid returns most coupons (column 6), but runs second to the 
Consumer Colour Magazine in terms of coupon response rate (the 
percentage of the delivered audience that return a coupon – column 7). 
The coupon conversion rate tells you how many coupon enquiries 
convert into ﬁ rst-time customers (column 9). The Daily News generates 
most orders from new customers (column 8), but the Consumer Colour 
Magazine generates the highest total order value (column 10), highest 
average order value (column 11) and the best advertisement cost to total 
sales ratio (column 12). The Sunday News turns out to perform worse 
than the other vehicles in all categories. It does, however, generate 
a relatively large number of lower value customers quite cost effectively. 
It generated 175 customers spending an average of $60, and for every 
dollar spent on advertising it yielded revenues of $17.50. 
   Critics of the use of advertising for customer acquisition claim that 
advertisements are ineffective at customer acquisition. They argue that 
advertisements work on current and past customers and therefore impact 
more on retention.  
7   Others point to the ineffectiveness of advertising at 
inﬂ uencing sales at all. Len Lodish, for example, concluded that  ‘ there 
is no simple correspondence between increased television advertising 
weight and increased sales ’ .8   In one study he found that the sales of only 
49 per cent of advertised products responded positively to increases in 
advertising weight.  9
    Sales promotion 
   Sales promotion can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 any behaviour-triggering temporary incentive aimed at prospects, 
customers, channel partners or salespeople. 
  Although sales promotions can be directed at salespeople and channel 
members, our concern here is only with sales promotions aimed at 
prospects. As the deﬁ  nition makes clear, sales promotions offer a 
temporary and immediate inducement to buy a product. They are not 

===== PAGE 265 =====
 
242 Customer Relationship Management
   12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2
   Vehicle  Date Readership  Ad space 
cost $ 
 Cost per 
thousand $ 
 Coupons 
returned 
 Coupon 
response 
rate 
 Orders received 
from new 
customers 
 Coupon 
conversion 
rate 
 Total order 
value $ 
 Average 
order 
value $ 
Ratio: Ad cost 
to total order 
value
   Daily News  15/3  300 000  $ 500  $ 1.67   655  0.0022%  200  30.53%  $10 000  $ 50  1:20 
   Supermarket 
tabloid
 20/3  500 000  $1000  $ 2.00  1205  0.0024%   80   6.64%  $ 3 200  $ 40  1:3.2 
   Sunday News  25/3  200 000  $ 600  $ 3.00   350  0.00175%  175  50.00%  $10 500  $ 60  1:17.5 
   Consumer colour 
magazine
 30/3   30 000  $1000  $33.33   120  0.004%  100  83.33%  $22 000  $220  1:22 
Table 8.1        Customer acquisition report  

===== PAGE 266 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer acquisition 243
part of the normal value proposition. There are many forms of consumer 
sales promotion: 
●       Sampling:  this is the provision of a free sample of the product. This can 
be delivered in a number of ways: mailed or dropped door-to-door, or 
bound or packed with a related item. Sampling is expensive, not only 
because of distribution costs, but also because it may be necessary to 
set up a special production run with unique promotional packaging. 
However, sampling is highly effective at generating a trial, especially 
if the sample is accompanied with a voucher offering a discount on 
the ﬁ rst regular purchase. Sampling has been used for coffee, breakfast 
cereal and moisturizer products. It has also been used in the online 
context. Charles Schwab, the execution-only broker, offered free e-trading 
to new customers. It signed up 8500 new customers, over 6000 of who 
remained active once the three month trial period ended. 
●       Free trials:  some companies offer products to customers on an approval 
basis. If they like the product they keep it and pay. Automobile dealers 
offer test drives to prospective purchasers. One bedding retailer offers 
beds on a free trial basis to customers. They deliver the bed to the 
customer’s home and let them try it for a month. If they don’t like it the 
company collects the bed. 
●       Discounts:  these are temporary price reductions. This reduces 
perceived risk and improves value for a ﬁ  rst time purchaser. 
Discounts can be promoted on-pack, at point-of-sale or in the media.  
●       Coupons:  these act like money. They are redeemable on purchase, at 
the point-of-sale.  
●       Rebates or cash back:   in consumer goods markets, these are often 
offered on-pack and require collection of proofs of purchase. Their use 
has extended into automobile and mortgage markets. Take out a loan 
to buy a car, and get $500 in cash back from the dealer.  
●       Bonus packs:  a bonus pack is a promotion in which the customer gets 
more volume at an unchanged price. A customer might get 2.5 litres 
of juice for the price of a 2 litre pack.  
●       Banded packs:  a banded pack promotion offers two, or rarely three, 
products banded together at a bundled price. A customer might be 
offered a banded pack of shaving gel and aftershave balm.  
●       Free premiums:   a free premium is a gift to the customer. The gift 
may be offered at the point-of-purchase, in packaging, or require the 
customer to mail, e-mail, text or phone in a request.  
●       Cross-promotions:  these occur when two or more non-competing 
brands create a mutual promotion. A proof of purchase from a theatre 
entitles the patron to a 25 per cent discount on a restaurant meal, and 
vice versa.  
●       Lotteries:  a lottery is a game of chance, not involving skill. Consumers 
are invited to purchase the product and be entered into a draw for 
a prize. Prizes are highly variable. They range from low value items 
to high value prizes such as personal makeovers, exotic vacations and 
even fully furnished houses.  
●       Competitions:  unlike a lottery, a competition requires skill or 
knowledge. The prizes are varied, as in the case of lotteries. 

===== PAGE 267 =====
 
244 Customer Relationship Management
    Buzz or word-of-mouth 
  A growing number of companies are trying to attract new customers 
through word-of-mouth (WOM) inﬂ  uence, also known as buzz. Word-
of-mouth can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 Word-of-mouth is interpersonal communication about a product or 
organization in which the receiver assumes the communicator to be 
independent of commercial inﬂ uence.   
  Word-of-mouth has been shown to inﬂ  uence receivers ’  knowledge, 
emotions, intentions and behaviours, and because of its apparent 
separation from commercial inﬂ uence it is regarded as independent and 
trustworthy. 10   Brands such as Body Shop, Amazon.com, YouTube.com and 
Krispy Kreme owe much of their success to word-of-mouth. Marketers 
can promote word-of-mouth by identifying and sponsoring opinion 
formers, such as radio show hosts. Giving people something to talk 
about is a high priority for buzz marketers; this includes advertisements, 
slogans and product innovations that are high in conversational value and 
capture people’s attention and interest. An example is Budweiser’s use of 
 ‘ Whassup? ’  in its TV commercials: the expression caught on in everyday 
communication. 
  Buzz marketing can be supported by online discussion groups or 
user forums. Viral marketing is a more carefully programmed way of 
enabling customers to pass on information about, or links to, products and 
organizations that they use or support. For example, if you buy an eBook 
produced in the .DNL format, each page has a  ‘ send to a friend ’  button 
so that you can share the book with a friend. The friend has access to a 
certain number of free pages before a payment gateway is encountered, at 
which the new reader has to pay by credit card to progress. 
    Merchandising 
   Merchandising can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 Merchandising is any behaviour-triggering stimulus or pattern of 
stimuli other than personal selling that takes place at retail or other 
points-of-sale.
  Merchandising is designed to inﬂ  uence behaviour in-store or at other 
points of sale such as restaurants, banks or gas stations. Merchandisers 
have a large number of techniques available. These include retail ﬂ  oor 
plans, shelf-space positioning, special displays, window displays and 
point-of-sale print. Some forms of merchandising are particularly useful 
for generating new customers, for example money-off signs,  ‘ as used by ’
and ‘ as advertised ’  signs. Related item displays place two or more related 
items together, for example toppings next to ice-cream or dressings next 
to salads. Sales of one category assist sales of the other, for example, a new 
type of topping or dressing. Eye-level positions on shelves are generally 
more productive than  ‘ reach ’  or  ‘ stoop ’  positions. If merchandisers can 

===== PAGE 268 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer acquisition 245
    Other tools for customer acquisition 
  As mentioned earlier in the section on B2B customer acquisition, B2C 
companies can also use referral schemes, promotions such as consumer 
exhibitions, publicity, telemarketing, e-mail and canvassing to generate 
new customers. 
  Companies believe that delighted, or even completely satisﬁ  ed 
customers will naturally speak well of the company. Eismann, the German 
frozen food manufacturer, estimates that 30 per cent of its new customers 
are recruited by  referrals  from satisﬁ ed customers. 
11   In spite of high levels 
of naturally-occurring referrals companies may still choose to develop 
a customer referral scheme (CRS). CRSs are also known as member-get-
member (MGM) and recommend-a-friend (RAF) schemes. These work 
by inviting existing customers to recommend a friend and rewarding 
the recommender with a gift. It is important to choose the right customer 
and the right time to invite a referral. Broadly, schemes are more effective 
when targeted at a relevant section of the customer base, for example 
customers who are satisﬁ  ed or customers who have just experienced 
excellent service. For example, companies offering roadside assistance to 
stranded motorists will ask for a referral when the vehicle is repaired and 
the customer’s anxiety levels have been reduced.  
12  
 Figure 8.3 
      Western Australian 
meat merchandised 
in Korea    
position new products in these preferred positions sales will be positively 
inﬂ uenced ( Figure 8.3   ) .    

===== PAGE 269 =====
 
246 Customer Relationship Management
   Lexus, the automobile manufacturer, invites up to 300 potential 
buyers to stylish events  such as dinner and theatre shows or dinner and 
concert performances. The Lexus vehicles are on display. Also invited 
are current Lexus owners who sit among the prospects and talk to them. 
Lexus knows from customer satisfaction surveys which customers to 
invite. It is a very soft sell. Current owners receive no direct reward for 
participation, other than the opportunity to enjoy the event itself. 
   Fashion retailers will organize fashion  shows  for current customers 
who are invited to bring along a friend who might be interested. Party 
plans have been popular for many years. Distributors of products such 
as Tupperware and Anne Summers sex aids organize parties in their 
own homes. They invite friends and neighbours along. Refreshments are 
offered and products are exhibited and demonstrated. 
   Free  publicity  such as that obtained by Richard Branson, founder 
of the Virgin Group of companies, enables many companies to spend 
less than major competitors on advertising. Branson excels at gaining 
publicity. When Virgin cola was launched in the USA, he hired a tank 
to roll into Times Square and take a  ‘ shot ’  at Coca Cola’s illuminated 
advertising sign. All the television networks were invited to ﬁ  lm 
the stunt, as were representatives of the press. A huge amount of free 
publicity was achieved as the brand sought to build its customer base. 
   Telemarketing and  cold-canvassing  to people’s homes is a contentious 
issue. Many customers feel that these methods are too intrusive, and 
privacy regulations may prevent companies from engaging in these 
practices. For example, in Australia people can register their landline 
and mobile telephone numbers on a ‘ Do Not Call ’  register. In some other 
countries, regulation is less restrictive and some industries, for example 
telecommunications and utilities, still use both telemarketing and door-
to-door canvassing for lead generation. Outbound telemarketing can 
then be used for lead qualiﬁ cation. Selling door-to-door to well-targeted 
       Case 8.1   
  Customer referrals at NTL      
   NTL is a leading Internet, telephone and pay television provider in the UK. The organization 
has grown both organically and through acquisition. It now has a customer base of over one 
million households. 
   To achieve further growth, NTL started to use its current customers to help with prospecting. 
The company developed proﬁ  les of customers who had previously referred others. This 
proﬁ le was mapped onto the entire database, and current customers matching the proﬁ  le 
were contacted. NTL offered one month’s free subscription to existing customers who 
introduced a new customer. This proved to be hugely successful, with 34 per cent of existing 
customers in the consumer broadband market referring at least one potential customer. After 
the two month promotion was complete, 29 per cent of those referred had signed up for 
a service with NTL. 

===== PAGE 270 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer acquisition 247
prospects is a different matter. Fuller Brushes, Avon Cosmetics, Collier’s 
Encyclopaedias and Prudential Insurance have a long tradition of door-
to-door selling. 
SMS  messaging can also be used for customer acquisition. Because 
it is text and not voice, it does not have to be ‘ answered ’  in the 
traditional sense. SMS has been used very successfully for local bar 
and club promotions among adolescent consumers. As the medium is 
so immediate, offers can be switched on at the last minute for highly 
perishable cinema and retail offers. As personal communication devices 
become more popular, so will the distribution of messaging in text and 
video formats, which will be increasingly targeted to the prospects ’  
known proﬁ les. 
E-mail  is also useful for B2C customer acquisition programmes ( Figure 
8.4   ). Over 95 per cent of people having Internet access at home use it 
for e-mail, often on a daily basis. 
13   In the UK, organizations such as Dell 
Computers, Barclays Bank, Comic Relief and Epson Printers have used 
e-mail to acquire new customers. The same beneﬁ  ts and reservations 
outlined in the earlier discussion of e-mail also apply in the B2C context. 
 Figure 8.4        Landing page from an e-mail customer acquisition campaign14    

===== PAGE 271 =====
 
248 Customer Relationship Management
  Recent innovations in new customer acquisition tactics are  product
placement  and product integration. Product placement involves 
arranging for products to be shown on display or in use in television 
shows, movies, videogames and web-cast productions. There is no 
explicit promotion of the product. It is simply seen in the production. 
Actors may use the product or it may be used as a background prop. 
There are three different compensation models for product placement. 
First, a company can pay for placement. Secondly, the product is donated 
in exchange for its appearance in the production: a form of barter. 
Thirdly, the product is donated to the production company to strengthen 
the storyline or build character, but is returned afterwards. A particular 
form of placement is product integration . This occurs where a product is 
integral to the storyline. Companies can pay considerable sums for their 
products to appear in movies. It is estimated that the product placement 
market was growing at a compound rate of over 16 per cent per annum, 
to a value of over US$3.5 billion in 2004. Researchers expect product 
placement to be worth US$7 billion in 2009. Over half product placements 
are food and beverage, health and beauty or household brands. 
15
Pitchers  or pitchmen approach prospective customers and ask them to 
buy a product. Pitching is a well-known practice in street trading, but has 
now been extended into other forms of retail. For example, pitchers will 
approach dancers in a club and ask them if they’ve tried a new drink, then 
suggest that they buy some. Pitchers generally are expected to act as if 
they are unpaid advocates, therefore simulating genuine word-of-mouth. 
    Key performance indicators 
of customer acquisition 
programmes
   CRM practitioners are concerned with three key performance indicators 
(KPIs) for these customer acquisition activities: 
    1.     How many customers are acquired? 
    2.     What is the cost per acquired customer? 
    3.     What is the value of the acquired customer?    
   The ideal result would be a low cost programme that generates lots of 
highly valuable customers. 
   Some customer acquisition programmes may require major capital 
investment, as well as incurring marketing expenses. A supermarket 
operator may build new stores to increase geographic coverage. A 
ﬁ nancial services institution may invest in IT infrastructure for a new 
Internet-based channel. A manufacturer of automotive parts may build a 
new factory close to prospective customers. 
  Customer referral schemes are very cost effective methods for acquiring 
customers. They cost little to operate, but they also generate few new 

===== PAGE 272 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer acquisition 249
customers. However, the customers generated by these schemes tend to 
be more loyal (less likely to churn) and higher spenders. Advertising can 
generate a lot of enquiries, but these may be very poor quality prospects, 
with low conversion rates into ﬁ  rst-time customers and, ultimately, 
low customer value. This is particularly true if the advertising is poorly 
targeted. Customers won by a sales promotion may be deal-prone. 
In other words, they are not acquired for the long-term, but switch 
whenever there is a better opportunity. 
   Companies can compare the relative costs of customer acquisition 
per channel before deciding how to spend their acquisition dollars. 
For example, a motoring membership organization knows that its 
member-get-member scheme has a direct cost per new customer of £22, 
compared to £100 for direct response television and £70 for door drops. 
The average is £35. A telecommunications company reports that it costs 
£52 to win a new customer through its recommend-a-friend programme, 
compared to an average of £100 and an advertising-generated cost of 
£200.
16   The costs of acquiring new customers online are variable over 
time and across categories. In 1999, Amazon.com claimed it was costing 
$29 to acquire each new customer; 17   credit card operators thought it cost 
$50 to $75, and mortgage customers cost $100 to $250 to acquire.  18
   Companies have a choice of acquiring new customers through 
relatively costly but fast-acting marketing investments, or through 
slower but low or zero-cost word-of-mouth processes. Julian Villanueva 
and colleagues have researched the effects of marketing-induced versus 
word-of-mouth customer acquisition on ﬁ  rm performance. Using data 
from an Internet ﬁ rm that provided free web hosting to registered users 
during a 70-week-long observation period, they found that customers 
acquired through word-of-mouth were themselves productive at 
generating new customers through their own word-of-mouth. They 
also generated more word-of-mouth activity than those acquired by 
marketing-induced channels. Each customer acquired through marketing 
is expected to bring around 1.59 new customers throughout his or her 
lifetime, while a customer acquired through word-of-mouth is expected 
to bring 3.23 customers (including him or herself).  
19
  Costs of customer acquisition are one-off costs that are not encountered 
again at any stage in a customer’s tenure. The costs might include 
prospecting costs, advertising costs, commissions to salespeople, collateral 
materials, sales promotion costs, credit referencing, supplying tangibles 
(e.g. credit cards) and database costs. Many sales managers incentivize 
their salespeople to ﬁ nd new customers. These incentives whether cash, 
merchandise or some other reward, are a cost of acquisition. 
    Making the right offer 
  In addition to carefully targeting new customers for acquisition, 
companies need to consider what offer they will make to the target. Some 
industries are consistent in their use of entry-level products for customer 
acquisition.

===== PAGE 273 =====
 
250 Customer Relationship Management
  Insurance companies use automobile insurance to acquire new 
customers. Developed countries require drivers to be insured to at least 
third-party level. Since insurance expires annually, it offers the prospect 
of repeat purchase. Generally premiums are highly discounted and 
offer little or no margin to the insurer. However, automobile insurance 
does give the company at least one year in which to cross-sell additional 
insurance products: home and contents insurance, travel insurance, 
health insurance, mortgage protection insurance and so on. Churn rates 
on automobile insurance can be as high as 50 per cent, giving average 
customer tenure of only two years. During this period insurers have to 
make the cross-sales. 
   Banks use relatively high interest rates on deposit accounts or 
relatively low charges on credit-cards. The world’s largest pure-play 
Internet bank is the Citibank-owned, UK-based brand ‘ Egg ’ . The bank 
has used incentive rates to win new credit card customers. Nearly 
nine out of ten newly acquired customers stayed with the bank when 
the incentive rates were withdrawn. Although only launched in 1998, 
Egg has been able to cross-sell additional products and services into 
the customer base, growing from a cross-holding ratio of 1.36 average 
products owned in 2001 to 2.95 in 2007. 
   Supermarkets price high demand, frequently purchased items, such as 
bread, as loss leaders in order to build store trafﬁ c.  
    Operational CRM tools that 
help customer acquisition 
   CRM software provides a number of operational tools that help in the 
customer acquisition process, including lead management, campaign 
management and event-based marketing. We cover these in more detail 
in Capters 14 and 15, but introduce them here. 
    Lead management 
  Sales-force automation (SFA) software helps B2B companies to manage 
the selling process. An important part of that process is lead management. 
There are hundreds of different lead management software vendors, some 
installed and some on-demand. Many of these enable the recommended 
lead management approaches of published sales methodologies to be 
implemented, among them the Customer-Centric Selling, Miller Heiman 
and Solution Selling methodologies. 
  The lead management process includes a number of subprocesses, 
including lead generation, lead qualiﬁ  cation, lead allocation and lead 
tracking. These need to operate effectively and efﬁ ciently. Lead allocation 
processes ensure that leads are routed to the right salesperson. Lead 
tracking processes trace the conversion of prospects into customers. Lead 
management software generally allows salespeople to customize their 
interactions by applying selling workﬂ  ow rules that vary according to 
prospect attributes, such as company size and level of qualiﬁ cation. Sales 

===== PAGE 274 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer acquisition 251
representatives may want to reject leads, further qualify them, redeﬁ  ne 
them as opportunities, or take other actions as required. 
   Successful lead management programmes are supported by analytics. 
Sales managers want to know which lead generation programmes 
generate high conversion rates and/or high revenues, which leads are 
costly to convert and which territories have the greatest success at lead 
generation and conversion.  
    Campaign management 
  Campaign management software is widely deployed in B2C 
environments for new customer acquisition. Campaign managers design, 
execute and measure marketing campaigns with the support of CRM 
technologies. Sometimes these are multimedia campaigns across direct 
mail, e-mail, fax, outbound telephony and SMS platforms. The technology 
assists in selecting and grouping potential customer targets, tracking 
contacts, measuring campaign results and learning from the results how 
to produce more effective and efﬁ cient campaigns in the future. 
  Campaign management software not only enables companies to 
manage and execute automated and personalized campaigns, generating 
leads for sales follow-up, but also enables them to generate and manage 
contact lists, while simultaneously complying with anti-spam legislation. 
  Experimentation is a common feature of campaign management. 
Experiments can be performed on subsets of the current customer 
database. For example, different cells of the recency–frequency–monetary 
value (RFM) matrix can be treated to different offers in order to develop 
an understanding of the propensities to buy of different customer groups. 
If the results were to show that women aged 15–25 were particularly 
responsive to a health and beauty bundled offer, you could search for 
prospects matching that proﬁ le, or buy additional lists to target. 
    Event-based marketing 
   Event-based marketing (EBM) is also used to generate new customers. 
EBM provides companies with opportunities to approach prospects at 
times which have a higher probability of leading to a sale. 
   In retail banking, an event such as a large deposit into a savings 
account might trigger an approach from the bank’s investment division. 
A name change might trigger an approach from a ﬁ  nancial planner. A 
call from a customer enquiring about rates of interest on a credit card 
might trigger a call from a customer retention specialist. 
   Many B2C companies can link purchasing to life stage events. For 
example, ﬁ nance companies target mortgages at newlyweds and empty 
nesters whose children have left home. Clothing retailers target different 
offerings at customers as they age: branded fashion clothing at single 
employed females; baby clothes for new mothers and so on. If you can 
associate purchasing with particular life stage events you’ll be well 
placed to target your customer acquisition efforts. 
   Public events, such as interest rate falls or hikes, tax law changes and 
weather events or competitive events, such as new product launches, 
might signal an EBM opportunity. For example, an insurance company 

===== PAGE 275 =====
 
252 Customer Relationship Management
might launch a health insurance campaign following announcements in 
the press of an upcoming inﬂ uenza epidemic. 
   Support from CRM analytics 
   Clearly, these operational CRM tools have to be supported by sound 
analytics to ensure that the right offer is made to the right prospect 
through the right channel at the right time. 
   It is often possible to query current customer-related databases for 
clues to guide customer acquisition. Supermarket operators can mine 
transactional data to provide insight into the baskets of goods that 
customers buy. If you were to ﬁ nd that 60 per cent of customers buying 
frozen apple pies also bought premixed custard, you might think it 
worthwhile targeting the other 40 per cent with an offer. A bank wanting 
to generate new customers for its savings account can develop a model 
predicting propensity to buy based on current product ownership. In the 
B2B environment, salespeople may have entered data about prospects ’  
satisfaction with competitors ’  offerings into their sales call records. 
Those who are less satisﬁ  ed will probably show a higher propensity to 
switch, and may be worth targeting with an offer. 
 Afﬁ liation data can also be used to guide customer acquisition. 
Customers may be members of, or otherwise associated with, a number 
of organizations: a university, a sports club or a charity. Afﬁ nity marketers 
recognize membership as an opportunity. Banks like MBNA have led 
the way in afﬁ  nity marketing of credit cards. MBNA, the organization 
and the member all beneﬁ t from the arrangement. MBNA offers a credit 
card to members of the organization. The organization receives a fee for 
allowing the bank access to its member data. Members enjoy a specially 
branded card and excellent customer experience from the bank. Afﬁ  nity 
groups include members of the World Wildlife Fund, fans of Manchester 
United and congregations of the Uniting Church.
       Case 8.2   
  How Standard Life used predictive analytics for customer 
acquisition      
   Standard Life used the SPSS data mining product, Clementine, to understand the 
characteristics of its mortgage clients better, so it could more accurately search for potential 
new clients. Also, the bank now has the capability to proﬁ le incoming prospects quickly and 
personalize their web experiences accordingly. As a result of its data mining efforts, Standard 
Life was able to build a propensity-to-buy model for the Standard Life bank mortgage, 
discover the key drivers for purchasing a remortgage product, achieve a nine-times greater 
response to its campaigning to the proﬁ  led group than a control group, and generate $47 
million of additional mortgage business. 
   Source: SPSS  20

===== PAGE 276 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer acquisition 253
      Summary    
   Customer acquisition is the ﬁ  rst issue that managers face as they attempt to build a 
valuable customer base. There are three major decisions to be made: which prospects 
to target; how to communicate with them; and what offer to communicate to them. 
New customers are of two kinds. They are either new to the product category or new 
to the company. In principle, the best prospects are those that have potential to become 
strategically signiﬁ cant customers, but any customer that generates value over and above 
their acquisition cost is a net contributor. You will certainly want to recruit new customers 
that generate more proﬁ t than they consume in acquisition and retention costs. 
   Business-to-business prospects are generated in a number of ways, including referrals, 
interpersonal networks, promotional activities such as exhibitions, trade shows and 
conferences, advertising, publicity and public relations, canvassing, telemarketing and 
e-mail.
   New customers for consumer companies can be generated from much the same 
sources as B2B prospects, but much greater effort is put into advertising, sales 
promotion, buzz or word-of-mouth and merchandising. 
   Operational CRM applications such as lead management, campaign management 
and event-based marketing are useful disciplines for customer acquisition. CRM 
analytics underpin the success of these applications. The transactional histories of 
current customers can be analysed and the cost-effectiveness of different customer 
acquisition strategies can be computed. By analysing customer data, companies are 
better informed about which prospects are most promising and which offers to make. 
Predictive modelling can determine relationship-starter products, such as automotive 
insurance which is used to acquire customers in the personal insurance market. When 
sales have been made and the customer’s permission to use their information has been 
obtained, other products can be cross-sold, turning acquisition into repeat purchase 
and subsequently into customer retention. 
  References  
       1.          Peppers ,    D.   and   Rogers ,    M.             ( 1997 )        Enterprise one-to-one             .  London : 
      Piatkus              .
       2.          Hofmeyr ,    J.   and   Rice ,    B.             ( 2000 )        Commitment-led marketing: the key to 
brand proﬁ ts is in the customer’s mind             .  Chichester :       John Wiley              .  
       3.          Chaffey ,    D.  ,   Mayer ,    R.  ,   Johnston ,    K.   and   Ellis-Chadwick ,    F.             ( 2000 ) 
 Internet marketing             .  London :       Financial Times/Prentice Hall              .  
       4.          Godin ,    S.             ( 1999 )        Permission marketing: turning strangers into friends and 
friends into customers             .  New York :       Simon and Schuster              .  
       5.         See discussion at http://www.frankwbaker.com/adsinaday.htm 
       6.         Herbert Krugman claimed that three exposures were enough. See 
Krugman, H.E. (1975) What makes advertising effective?  Harvard
Business Review , March–April, p. 98. 

===== PAGE 277 =====
 
254 Customer Relationship Management
       7.         Ehrenberg, A.S.C. (1974) Repetitive advertising and the consumer. 
Journal of Advertising Research , Vol. 14, pp. 25–34; Barnard, N. and 
Ehrenberg, A.S.C. (1997) Advertising: strongly persuasive or just 
nudging? Journal of Advertising Research , Vol. 37(1), pp. 21–31. 
       8.          Lodish ,    L.  ,   Abraham ,    M.  ,   Kalmenson ,    S.  ,   Livelsberger ,    J.  ,   Lubetkin ,    B.  ,
  Richardson ,    B.   and   Stevens ,    M.E.                ( 1995 )        How TV advertising works: a 
meta-analysis of 389 real-world split cable TV advertising experiments .
Journal of Marketing Research       , Vol.  32         , May–June, pp.  125  –       139        . 
       9.          Abraham ,    M.M.   and   Lodish ,    L.                ( 1990 )        Getting the most out of 
advertising and promotion .            Harvard Business Review        ,  Vol. 68      ( 3 )       , 
p p . 5 0   –        5 6         .   
      10.          Buttle ,    F.                ( 1998 )        Word-of-mouth: understanding and managing 
referral marketing .             Journal of Strategic Marketing       ,  Vol. 6         , pp.  241  –       254        .  
      11.          Naumann ,    E.             ( 1995 )        Creating customer value: the path to sustainable 
competitive advantage             .  Cincinnati, OH :       International Thomson Press              .  
      12.         Buttle, F. and Kay, S. (2000) RAFs, MGMs and CRSs: Is £10 enough? 
Proceedings of the Academy of Marketing Annual Conference. 
      13.         LBM Internet, UK. Personal communication. 
      14.         Courtesy of Norwich Union.  http://www.norwichunion.com/       
      15.          http://www.pqmedia.com/ ppsm2005-es.pdf. Accessed 20 October 
2007.
      16.         Buttle, F. and Kay, S. (2000) RAFs, MGMs and CRSs: Is £10 enough? 
Proceedings of the Academy of Marketing Annual Conference. 
      17.          Lee ,    J.                ( 1999 )        Net stock frenzy .            Fortune       ,  Vol. 39      ( 2 )       , 1 February, 
pp. 148  –       151        .
      18.          Gurley ,   J.W.                ( 1998 )        The soaring cost of e-commerce .            Fortune       ,  Vol. 
138      ( 2 )       , 3 August, pp.  226  –       228        .  
      19.         Villanueva, J., Yoo, S. and Hanssens, D.M. (2006) The impact of 
marketing-induced versus word-of-mouth customer acquisition on 
customer equity. Marketing Science Institute working paper 06–119.      
      20.         http://www.spss.com/success/template_view.cfm?Story_ID /H11005     7 8 .  
Accessed 25 July 2007. 

===== PAGE 278 =====
 
               Managing the 
customer lifecycle: 
customer retention and 
development  
 Chapter 9 

===== PAGE 279 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 280 =====
 
           Chapter objectives      
   By the end of this chapter, you will understand: 
1.   what is meant by the term  ‘ customer retention ’  
    2.   the economics of customer retention  
    3.   how to select which customers to target for retention  
    4.   the distinction between positive and negative customer retention  
    5.   several strategies for improving customer retention performance  
    6.   several strategies for growing customer value  
    7.   why and how customers are  ‘ sacked ’          .
    Introduction 
   The customer lifecycle is made up of three core customer management 
processes: customer acquisition, customer retention and customer 
development. The processes of customer retention and development are 
the focus of this chapter. Customer acquisition is covered in Chapter 8. 
   The major strategic purpose of CRM is to manage, for proﬁ  t, a 
company’s relationships with customers through three stages of the 
customer lifecycle: customer acquisition, customer retention and 
customer development. 
  A customer retention strategy aims to keep a high proportion of 
valuable customers by reducing customer defections (churn), and a 
customer development strategy aims to increase the value of those 
retained customers to the company. Just as customer acquisition is 
focused on particular prospects, retention and development also focus 
on particular customers. Focus is necessary because not all customers are 
worth retaining and not all customers have potential for development. 
   We will deal with the issue of retention ﬁ  rst, before turning to 
development.
  A number of important questions have to be answered when a 
company puts together a customer retention strategy. 
●      Which customers will be targeted for retention?  
●      What customer retention strategies will be used?  
●      How will the customer retention performance be measured?    
   We believe that these issues need to be carefully considered and 
programmed into a properly resourced customer retention plan. Many 
companies, perhaps as many as six out of ten, have no explicit customer 
retention plan in place. 
1   Most companies spend a majority of their time, 
energy and resources chasing new business, with 75 per cent or more of 
marketing budgets being earmarked for customer acquisition.  2

===== PAGE 281 =====
 
258 Customer Relationship Management
    What is customer retention? 
  Customer retention is the maintenance of continuous trading relationships 
with customers over the long term. Customer retention is the mirror 
image of customer defection or churn. High retention is equivalent to low 
defection.3
   Conventionally, customer retention is deﬁ ned as: 4
 Customer retention is the number of customers doing business with 
a ﬁ rm at the end of a ﬁ nancial year, expressed as percentage of those 
who were active customers at the beginning of the year. 
   However, the appropriate interval over which retention rate should be 
measured is not always one year. Rather, it depends on the customer 
repurchase cycle. Car insurance and magazine subscriptions are bought 
on an annual basis. Carpet tiles and hi-ﬁ  s are not. If the normal hi-ﬁ
replacement cycle is four years, then retention rate is more meaningful 
if it is measured over four years instead of twelve months. Additional 
complexity is added when companies sell a range of products and 
services, each with different repurchase cycles. Automobile dealers 
might sell cars, parts, fuel and service to a single customer. These 
products have different repurchase cycles which make it very difﬁ  cult 
for the dealer to have a whole of customer perspective on retention. 
   Sometimes companies are not clear about whether an individual 
customer has defected. This is because of the location of customer-
related data, which might be retained in product silos, channel silos or 
functional silos. 
●       Product silos:  consider personal insurance. Insurance companies often 
have product-based information systems. Effectively, they regard an 
insurance policy as a customer. If the policy is renewed, the customer 
is regarded as retained. However, take a customer who shops around 
for a better price and, after the policy has expired, returns to the 
original insurer. The insurer may take the new policy to mean a new 
customer has been gained, and an old customer has churned. They 
would be wrong.  
●       Channel silos:   in the B2B context, independent ofﬁ  ce equipment 
dealers have formed into cooperative buying groups to purchase 
goods at lower prices and beneﬁ  t from other economies of scale in 
marketing. When a dealer stops buying direct from Brother Electronics 
and joins a buying group, Brother’s customer data may report a 
defection, but all that has happened is that the dealer has begun to 
buy through a different channel.  
5   Telecommunications companies 
acquire customers through many channels. Consider a customer 
who buys a 12 month mobile phone contract from a Vodafone-owned 
retail outlet. Part way through the year Vodafone launches a new 
pay-as-you-go product with no contractual obligation. The customer 
allows her current contract to expire and then buys the new pay-as-
you-go product, not from a Vodafone outlet but from a supermarket. 

===== PAGE 282 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer retention and development 259
Vodafone regards her as a lost customer because the contract was not 
renewed. They would be wrong.  
●       Functional silos:   customer-related data are often kept in functional 
silos that are not integrated to provide a whole of customer 
perspective. A customer might not have made a product purchase for 
several years, and is therefore regarded as a churned customer on the 
sales database. However, the same customer might have several open 
queries or issues on the customer service database, and is therefore 
regarded as still active. 
  The use of aggregates and averages in calculating customer retention 
rates can mask a true understanding of retention and defection. This 
is because customers differ in their sales, costs-to-serve and buying 
behaviours. It is not unusual for a small number of customers to account 
for a large proportion of company revenue. If you have 100 customers 
and lose ten in the course of a year, your raw defection rate is 10 per 
cent. But what if these customers account for 25 per cent your company’s 
sales? Is the true defection rate 25 per cent? Consideration of proﬁ t makes 
the computation even more complex. If the 10 per cent of customers 
that defected produce 50 per cent of your company’s proﬁ  ts, is the true 
defection rate 50 per cent? 
   What happens if the 10 per cent of lost customers are at the other end 
of the sales and proﬁ  t spectrum? In other words what if they buy very 
little and/or have a high cost-to-serve? It could be that they contribute 
less than 5 per cent to sales and actually generate a negative proﬁ  t, i.e. 
they cost more to serve than they generate in margin. The loss of some 
customers might improve the company’s proﬁ  t performance. It is not 
inconceivable that a company could retain 90 per cent of its customers, 
95 per cent of its sales and 105 per cent of its proﬁ t! 
  A solution to this problem is to consider three measures of customer 
retention: 
    1 .       Raw customer retention rate:   this is the number of customers doing 
business with a ﬁ  rm at the end of a trading period, expressed as 
percentage of those who were active customers at the beginning of 
the period.  
    2 .       Sales-adjusted retention rate:   this is the value of sales achieved 
from the retained customers, expressed as a percentage of the sales 
achieved from all customers who were active at the beginning of the 
period.
    3 .       Proﬁ t-adjusted retention rate:   this is the proﬁ  t earned from the 
retained customers, expressed as a percentage of the proﬁ  t earned 
from all customers who were active at the beginning of the period.    
  A high raw customer retention rate does not always signal excellent 
customer retention performance. This is because customer defection 
rates vary across cohorts of customers. Defection rates tend to be much 
higher for newer customers than longer tenure customers. Over time, as 
seller and buyer demonstrate commitment, trust grows and it becomes 
progressively more difﬁ  cult to break the relationship.  
6   Successful 

===== PAGE 283 =====
 
260 Customer Relationship Management
customer acquisition programmes could produce the effect of a high 
customer defection rate, simply because new customers are more likely 
to defect. 
  A high sales-adjusted customer retention rate might also need 
some qualiﬁ cation. Consider a corporate customer purchasing ofﬁ  ce 
equipment. The customer’s business is expanding fast. It purchased 
30 personal computers (PCs) last year, 20 of which were sourced from 
Apex Ofﬁ ce Supplies. This year it bought 50 PCs, of which 30 were from 
Apex. From Apex’s point of view it has grown customer value by 50 
per cent (from 20 to 30 machines), which it might regard as an excellent 
achievement. However, in a relative sense, Apex’s share of customer 
has fallen from 67 per cent (20/30) to 60 per cent (30/50). How should 
Apex regard this customer? The customer is clearly a retained customer 
in a ‘ raw ’  sense, has grown in absolute value, but has fallen in relative 
value. Consider also a retail bank customer who maintains a savings 
account, but during the course of a year transfers all but a few dollars 
of her savings to a different institution in pursuit of a better interest rate. 
This customer is technically still active, but signiﬁ  cantly less valuable to 
the bank.  
    Manage customer retention 
or value retention? 
   This discussion indicates that companies should focus on retaining 
customers that contribute value. Sometimes this will mean that the 
focus is not on retention of customers, per se, but on retention of share of 
wallet. In the banking industry, for example, it may be more important 
for companies to focus on managing the overall downward migration of 
customer spending than managing customer retention. Many customers 
simply change their buying behaviour rather than defect. Changes in 
buying behaviour may be responsible for greater changes in customer 
value than defection. One bank, for example, lost 3 per cent of its total 
balances when 5 per cent of checking account customers defected 
in a year, but lost 24 per cent of its total balances when 35 per cent of 
customers reduced the amounts deposited in their checking accounts. 
The need to manage migration, rather than defection, is particularly 
important when customers engage in portfolio purchasing by transacting 
with more than one supplier.  
7
   Improving customer retention is an important objective for many CRM 
implementations. Its deﬁ  nition and measurement need to be sensitive 
to the sales, proﬁ  tability and value issues discussed previously. It is 
important to remember that the fundamental purpose of focusing CRM 
efforts on customer retention is to ensure that the company maintains 
relationships with value-adding customers. It may not be beneﬁ  cial to 
maintain relationships with all customers; some may be too costly to 
serve, others may be strategic switchers constantly in search of a better 
deal. These can be value-destroyers, not value-adders.  

===== PAGE 284 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer retention and development 261
    Economics of customer 
retention
   There is a strong economic argument in favour of customer retention, 
which was ﬁ rst introduced in Chapter 2. The argument goes as follows:  8
    1 .       Increasing purchases as tenure grows:   over time, customers come to 
know their suppliers. Providing the relationship is satisfactory, trust 
grows while risk and uncertainty are reduced. Therefore, customers 
commit more of their spending to those suppliers with whom they 
have a proven and satisfactory relationship. Also, because suppliers 
develop deeper customer intimacy over time, they can enjoy better 
yields from their cross-selling efforts.  
    2 .       Lower customer management costs over time:   the relationship start-
up costs that are incurred when a customer is acquired can be quite 
high. It may take several years for enough proﬁ t to be earned from the 
relationship to recover those acquisition costs. For example, it can take 
six years to recover the costs of winning a new retail bank customer.  
9
In the B2B context in particular, ongoing relationship maintenance 
costs such as selling and service costs can be low relative to the 
costs of winning the account. Therefore, there is a high probability 
that the account will become more proﬁ  table on a period-by-period 
basis as tenure lengthens. These relationship maintenance costs 
may eventually be signiﬁ  cantly reduced or even eliminated as the 
parties become closer over time. In the B2B context, once automated 
processes are in place, transaction costs are effectively eliminated. 
Portals largely transfer account service costs to the customer. In the 
B2C context, especially in retailing, the assertion that acquisition 
costs generally exceed retention costs is hard to prove. This is in part 
because it is very difﬁ cult to isolate and measure customer acquisition 
costs.
10
    3 .       Customer referrals:   customers who willingly commit more of their 
purchases to a preferred supplier are generally more satisﬁ  ed than 
customers who do not. They are therefore more likely to utter positive 
word-of-mouth and inﬂ  uence the beliefs, feelings and behaviours of 
others. Research shows that customers who are frequent buyers are 
heavier referrers. For example, online clothing customers who have 
bought once refer three other people; after ten purchases they will 
have referred seven. In consumer electronics, the one-time customer 
refers four; the ten times customer refers 13. The referred customers 
spend about 50 to 75 per cent of the referrer’s spending over the ﬁ  rst 
three years of their relationship.  
11   However, it is also likely that newly 
acquired customers, freshly enthused by their experience, would be 
powerful word-of-mouth advocates, perhaps more than longer-term 
customers who are more habituated.  12
    4 .       Premium prices:   customers who are satisﬁ  ed in their relationship 
may reward their suppliers by paying higher prices. This is because 
they get their sense of value from more than price alone. Customers 

===== PAGE 285 =====
 
262 Customer Relationship Management
in an established relationship are also likely to be less responsive to 
price appeals offered by competitors.    
  These conditions mean that retained customers are generally more 
proﬁ table than newly acquired customers. Drawing from their consulting 
experience, Dawkins and Reichheld report that a 5 per cent increase in 
customer retention rate leads to an increase in the net present value of 
customers by between 25 and 95 per cent across a wide range of industries, 
including credit cards, insurance brokerage, automobile services and ofﬁ ce 
building management. 
13   In short, customer retention drives up customer 
lifetime value. 
    Which customers to retain? 
  Simply, the customers who have greatest strategic value to your company 
are prime candidates for your retention efforts. These are the customers we 
deﬁ ned as having high lifetime value or who are otherwise strategically 
signiﬁ cant as high volume customers, benchmarks, inspirations or door 
openers, as described in Chapter 5. 
  You need to bear in mind that the cost of customer retention may be 
considerable. Your most valued customers are also likely to be very 
attractive to your competitors. If the costs of retaining customers become 
too great then they might lose their status as strategically signiﬁ cant. 
   The level of commitment between your customer and you will ﬁ  gure 
in the decision about which customers to retain. If the customer is highly 
committed, they will be impervious to the appeals of competitors, and 
you will not need to invest so much in their retention. However, if you 
have highly signiﬁ cant customers who are not committed, you may want 
to invest considerable sums in their retention. 
   Some companies prefer to focus their retention efforts on their recently 
acquired customers. They often have greater future lifetime value 
potential than longer tenure customers. There is some evidence that 
retention rates rise over time, so if defections can be prevented in the 
early stages of a relationship, there will be a pay-off in future revenue 
streams.  
14  A further justiﬁ  cation for focusing on recently acquired 
customers comes from research into service failures. When customers 
experience service failure, they may be more forgiving if they have 
a history of good service with the service provider. In other words, 
customers who have been recently acquired and let down are more 
likely to defect or reduce their spending than customers who have a 
satisfactory history with the supplier.  
15
   Retention efforts where there is portfolio purchasing can be very 
difﬁ cult. Should effort be directed at retaining the high-share customer 
with whom you have a proﬁ  table relationship, the medium-share 
customer from whom you might lose additional share to competitors or 
the low-share customer from whom there is considerable lifetime value 
potential? The answer will depend on the current value of the customer, 
the potential for growing that value, and the cost of maintaining and 
developing the relationship.  

===== PAGE 286 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer retention and development 263
    Strategies for customer 
retention
    Positive and negative retention strategies 
  An important distinction can be made between strategies that lock the 
customer in by penalizing their exit from a relationship, and strategies 
that reward a customer for remaining in a relationship. The former are 
generally considered negative, and the latter positive, customer retention 
strategies. Negative customer retention strategies impose high switching 
costs on customers, discouraging their defection. 
  In a B2C context, mortgage companies have commonly recruited new 
customers with attractive discounted interest rates. When the honeymoon 
period is over, these customers may want to switch to another provider, 
only to discover that they will be hit with early redemption and exit 
penalties. Customers wishing to switch retail banks ﬁ  nd that it is less 
simple than anticipated: direct debits and standing orders have to be 
reorganized. In a B2B context, a customer may have agreed a deal to 
purchase a given volume of raw material at a quoted price. Some way 
through the contract a lower cost supplier makes a better offer. The 
customer wants to switch, but ﬁ  nds that there are penalty clauses in 
the contract. The new supplier is unwilling to buy the customer out of 
the contract by paying the penalties. 
   Some customers ﬁ nd these switching costs are so high that they 
remain customers, though unwillingly. The danger for CRM practitioners 
is that negative customer retention strategies produce customers who 
feel trapped. They are likely to agitate to be freed from their obligations, 
taking up much management time. Also, they may utter negative word-
of-mouth. They are unlikely to do further business with that supplier. 
Companies that pursue these strategies argue that customers need to 
be aware of what they are buying and the contracts they sign. The total 
cost of ownership (TCO) of a mortgage should, and does, include early 
redemption costs. 
   When presented with dissatisﬁ ed customers complaining about high 
relationship exit (switching) costs, companies have a choice. They can 
either enforce the terms and conditions, or not. The latter path is more 
attractive when the customer is strategically signiﬁ  cant, particularly if 
the company can make an offer that matches that of the prospective new 
supplier. 
    Positive customer retention 
strategies
   In the following sections we look at a number of positive customer 
retention strategies, including creating customer delight, adding 

===== PAGE 287 =====
 
264 Customer Relationship Management
customer-perceived value, creating social and structural bonds and 
building customer engagement. 
    Customer delight 
   It is very difﬁ cult to build long-term relationships with customers if 
their needs and expectations are not understood and well met. It is a 
fundamental precept of modern customer management that companies 
should understand customers, and then acquire and deploy resources to 
ensure their satisfaction and retention. This is why CRM is grounded on 
detailed customer-related knowledge. Customers that you are not able 
to serve well may be better served by your competitors. 
  Delighting customers, or exceeding customer expectations, means 
going beyond what would normally satisfy the customer. This does not 
necessarily mean being world-class or best-in-class. It does mean being 
aware of what it usually takes to satisfy the customer and what it might 
take to delight or pleasantly surprise the customer. You cannot really 
strategize to delight the customer if you do not understand the customer’s 
fundamental expectations. You may stumble onto attributes of your 
performance that do delight the customer, but you cannot consistently 
expect to do so unless you have deep customer insight. Consistent 
efforts to delight customers show your commitment to the relationship. 
Commitment builds trust. Trust begets relationship longevity. 
   Customer delight occurs when the customer’s perception of their 
experience of doing business with you exceeds their expectation. In 
formulaic terms: 
CD P E/H11005>       
   where CD      /H11005      customer delight, P      /H11005      perception and E      /H11005      expectation. 
   This formula implies that customer delight can be inﬂ  uenced in 
two ways: by managing expectations or by managing performance. 
In most commercial contexts customer expectations exceed customer 
perceptions of performance. In other words, customers can generally 
ﬁ nd cause for dissatisfaction. You might think that this would encourage 
companies to attempt to manage customer expectations down to levels 
that can be delivered. However, competitors may well be improving 
their performance in an attempt to meet customer expectations. If your 
strategy is to manage expectations down, you may well lose customers 
to the better performing company. This is particularly likely if you fail to 
meet customer expectations on important attributes. 
  Customers have expectations of many attributes, for example product 
quality, service responsiveness, price stability and the physical appearance 
of your people and vehicles. These are unlikely to be equally important. It 
is critical to meet customer expectations on attributes that are important to 
the customer. Online customers, for example, look for rapid and accurate 
order fulﬁ lment, good price, high levels of customer service and website 
functionality. Online retailers must meet these basic requirements. 
   Dell Computers believes that customer retention is the outcome of 
their performance against three variables: order fulﬁ  lment (on-time, in 
full, no error (OTIFNE)), product performance (frequency of problems 

===== PAGE 288 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer retention and development 265
encountered by customers) and after-sales service (percentage of 
problems ﬁ xed ﬁ rst time by technicians). The comments in parentheses 
are the metrics that Dell uses. 
   Figure 9.1    identiﬁ es a number of priorities for improvement (PFIs) 
for a restaurant company. The PFIs are the attributes where customer 
satisfaction scores are low, but the attributes are important to customers. In 
the example, the PFIs are food quality and toilet cleanliness. There would 
be no advantage in investing in speedier service or more helpful staff. 
106.5 9.5 98.587.57
Cleanliness
Quality of food
Speed of service
Helpfulness of staff
Toilets
Seating
Portion size
Décor
SatisfactionImportance
PFI
PFI
 Figure 9.1 
      Using customer 
satisfaction and 
importance data to 
identify priorities 
for improvement    
    Kano’s customer delight model 
  Noriaki Kano has developed a product quality model that distinguishes 
between three forms of quality. Basic qualities are those that the customer 
routinely expects in the product. These expectations are often unexpressed 
until the product fails. For example, a car’s engine should start ﬁ  rst time 
every time, and the sunroof should not leak. The second form is linear 
quality. These are attributes of which the customer wants more or less; 
for example, better comfort, better fuel economy and reduced noise 
levels. Marketing research can usually identify these requirements. Better 
performance on these attributes generates better customer satisfaction. 
The third form is attractive quality. These are attributes that surprise, 
delight and excite customers. They are answers to latent, unarticulated, 
needs and are often difﬁ cult to identify in marketing research. As shown 
in Figure 9.2   , Kano’s analysis suggests that customers can be delighted 
in two ways: by enhancing linear qualities beyond expectations and by 
creating innovative attractive qualities. 
16
   Exceeding expectations need not be costly. For example, a sales 
representative could do a number of simple things such as: 
●      volunteer to collect and replace a faulty product from a customer 
rather than issuing a credit note and waiting for the normal call cycle 
to schedule a call on the customer  

===== PAGE 289 =====
 
266 Customer Relationship Management
●      offer better, lower cost solutions to the customer, even though that 
might reduce proﬁ t margin 
●      provide information about the customer’s served market. A packaging 
company, for example, might alert a fast-moving consumer goods 
manufacturer customer to competitive initiatives in their served 
markets.
   Some efforts to delight customers can go wrong. For example, sooner is 
not necessarily better: if a retail store customer has requested delivery 
between 1 pm and 3 pm, and the driver arrives an hour early, the truck 
may clog up goods inwards and interfere with a carefully scheduled 
unload plan. Many contact centres play music while callers are waiting 
online. This is to divert the caller’s attention and to create the illusion 
of faster passage of time. However, the cycle time of the selected music 
must not be too fast, otherwise callers will be exposed to the same 
songs repeatedly. Also, the music needs to be appropriate to the context. 
Customers may not appreciate  ‘ (I Can’t Get No) Satisfaction ’  by the 
Rolling Stones if they are waiting online to complain. 
  A number of companies have adopted  ‘ Customer Delight ’  as their 
mission, including Cisco, American Express and Kwik Fit, the auto service 
chain. Others pay homage to the goal but do not organize to achieve it. In 
the service industries, customer delight requires frontline employees to 
be trained, empowered and rewarded for doing what it takes to delight 
customers. It is in the interaction with customers that contact employees 
have the opportunity to understand and exceed their expectations. The 
service quality attributes of empathy and responsiveness are on show 
when employees successfully delight customers. 
Attractive qualities
(unexpected attributes)
Linear qualities
(wanted attributes)
Basic qualities
(expected attributes)
Customer delight
Customer dissatisfaction
Level of achievement
HighLow
Inadequate
Exceptional
Missing
 Figure 9.2 
      Customer delight 
through product 
quality.    
Source: Kano 1995

===== PAGE 290 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer retention and development 267
   Companies sometimes complain that investing in customer delight 
is unproductive. As noted earlier, expectations generally increase as 
competitors strive to offer better value to customers. Over time, as 
customers experience delight, their expectations change. What was 
exceptional becomes the norm. In Kano’s terms, what used to be an 
attractive attribute becomes a linear or basic attribute. It no longer 
delights. Delight decays into normal expectation, and companies have 
to look for new ways to pleasantly surprise customers. In a competitive 
environment, it seems to make little sense to resist the quest for customer 
delight because competitors will simply drive up expectations anyway.   
    Add customer-perceived value 
  The second major positive customer retention strategy is to add customer-
perceived value. Companies can explore ways to create additional value 
for customers. The ideal is to add value for customers without creating 
additional costs for the company. If costs are incurred then the value-adds 
may be expected to recover those costs. For example, a customer club 
may be expected to generate a revenue stream from its membership. 
   There are three common forms of value-adding programme: loyalty 
schemes, customer clubs and sales promotions. 
    Loyalty schemes 
   Loyalty schemes reward customers for their patronage. Loyalty schemes 
or programmes can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 A loyalty programme is a scheme that offers delayed or immediate 
incremental rewards to customers for their cumulative patronage.   
   The more a customer spends, the higher the reward. Loyalty schemes 
have a long history. In 1844, in the UK, the Rochdale Pioneers developed 
a cooperative retailing operation that distributed surpluses back to 
members in the form of a dividend. The surpluses were proportionate 
to customer spend. S & H Pink Stamps and Green Shield stamps were 
collected in the 1950s and 1960s, and redeemed for gifts selected from 
catalogues. In the 1970s, Southwest Airlines ran a  ‘ Sweetheart Stamps ’  
programme that enabled travellers to collect proofs of purchase and 
surrender them for a free ﬂ ight for their partner.  
17
   Today’s CRM-enabled loyalty schemes owe their structure to the 
frequent ﬂ  ier programmes (FFP) that started with American Airlines ’
Advantage programme in 1981. The airline made a strategic decision to 
use its spare capacity as a resource to generate customer loyalty. Airlines 
are high ﬁ  xed-cost businesses. Costs do not change much, regardless 
of whether the load factor is 25 per cent or 95 per cent. American knew 
that ﬁ  lling the empty seats would have little impact on costs, but 
could impact signiﬁ  cantly on future demand. The airline searched its 
reservation system, SABRE, for details of frequent ﬂ  iers in order to offer 
them the reward of free ﬂ ights. 
   This basic model has migrated from airlines into many other B2C 
sectors: hotels, restaurants, retail, car hire, gas stations and bookstores, 

===== PAGE 291 =====
 
268 Customer Relationship Management
for example. It has also transferred into B2B contexts with many 
suppliers offering loyalty rewards to long-term customers. 
   The mechanics of these schemes have changed over time. Initially, 
stamps were collected. The ﬁ  rst card-based schemes were anonymous, 
i.e. they carried no personal data, not even the name of the participant. 
Then magnetic stripe cards were introduced, followed by chip-embedded 
cards that carried a lot of personal and transactional data. Innovators 
developed their own individual schemes. Eventually, these transformed 
into linked schemes, in which, for example, it was possible to collect air 
miles from various participating companies such as gas stations, credit 
cards and food retailers. Current schemes are massively different from 
the early programmes. For example, Nectar is a consortium loyalty 
scheme operating in the UK managed not by the participants, but by an 
independent third party. Its core retail participants are all number one 
or two in their respective markets: Sainsbury’s, Barclaycard, Debenhams 
and BP . Shoppers register with the scheme, then carry a single 
magnetic stripe card and collect points that are converted into vouchers 
redeemable in a wide range of retailers, including supermarkets, liquor 
stores, catalogue retailers, restaurants, hotels, cinemas, travel outlets 
and tourist attractions. Each of the major retail participants had been 
a member of another loyalty programme, and customers were able to 
convert their existing credits to Nectar points (see  Figure 9.3   ). 
 Figure 9.3        Nectar loyalty program    
  Loyalty programmes provide added value to consumers at two points, 
during credit acquisition and at redemption. Although the credits have 

===== PAGE 292 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer retention and development 269
no material value until they are redeemed, they may deliver some 
pre-redemption psychological beneﬁ  ts to customers, such as a sense 
of belonging and of being valued, and an enjoyable anticipation of 
desirable future events. At the redemption stage, customers receive 
both psychological and material beneﬁ  ts. The reward acts to positively 
reinforce purchase behavior. It also demonstrates that the company 
appreciates its customers. This sense of being recognized as valued 
and important can enhance customers ’  overall sense of well-being and 
emotional attachment to the ﬁ rm. However, customers can become loyal 
to the scheme, rather than to the company or brand behind the scheme. 
18
  Loyalty schemes are not without critics. Critics question their cost 
and effectiveness. Certainly, they can be very expensive to establish and 
manage. In respect of operating costs, retail schemes typically reward 
customers with a cash rebate or vouchers equivalent to 1 per cent of 
purchases. This comes straight out of the bottom line so a retailer that is 
making 5 per cent margin loses one-ﬁ fth or 20 per cent of its proﬁ t to fund 
the scheme. There may also be a signiﬁ  cant investment in technology to 
support the scheme, and marketing to launch and sustain the scheme. 
Supermarket operator Safeway dropped its UK loyalty programme, which 
had been costing about £30 million annually. Shell is reported to have 
spent up to £40 million to develop its smart card scheme. 
19   Unredeemed 
credits represent liabilities for scheme operators. For example, it has been 
suggested that if all the unused air miles were redeemed on the same day 
it would take 600 000 Boeing 747s to meet the demand. 20  
       Case 9.1   
  Loyalty programme at Boots the Chemist      
  Boots the Chemist is the UK’s leading health and beauty retailer. Ninety per cent of the UKs 
60 million plus population visits a Boots store at least once a year. The company has an annual 
turnover of around £3 billion from a network of some 1500 stores in the UK and Irish Republic. 
   Boots launched their CRM strategy in 1999. It was built around the  ‘ Advantage Card ’ , 
a loyalty programme enabled by a chip-embedded smart card. The standard reward for 
purchases is four points for every £1 spent, equivalent to a 4 per cent discount or rebate. 
This is a very generous rate of reward compared to the other retail sectors, where the major 
supermarket loyalty schemes represent a 1 per cent saving for customers. 
  After an initial investment in excess of £30 million, the programme has become the third 
largest retail loyalty scheme in the UK. Boots reported that it took three years to achieve the 
programme’s revenue objectives, and there have been many other beneﬁ  ts such as higher 
levels of customer retention, increased in-store spending and overall increased proﬁ tability. 
   Boots took its time to introduce the scheme, rather than rapidly following the trend to loyalty 
schemes in the early 1990s. It conducted extensive market research to determine which 
customer segments to target, how to differentiate their programme and how to ensure that 
it ﬁ tted the organization’s image. The market research discovered that 83 per cent of Boots ’
customers were female, aged 20–45, who on 55 per cent of their visits to a store purchased 

===== PAGE 293 =====
 
270 Customer Relationship Management
  Schemes are also criticized for their effectiveness. Critics claim that 
schemes have become less distinctive and value-adding as many 
competitors now operate me-too programmes. Indeed, it is very hard to 
ﬁ nd any hotel chain that does not have a loyalty programme. Customers 
now expect to accumulate credits as part of the standard hotel value 
proposition. Many UK supermarket shoppers carry loyalty cards from 
more than one supermarket. 
21   The customer’s choice set when grocery 
shopping might include all suppliers with whom they have a card-based 
relationship. 
   One major concern is that loyalty schemes may not be creating loyalty 
at all. Loyalty takes two forms: attitudinal and behavioural loyalty. 
Attitudinal loyalty is reﬂ  ected in positive affect towards the brand or 
supplier. Behavioural loyalty is reﬂ  ected in purchasing behaviour.  22
There is very little longitudinal evidence about shifts in customer 
behaviours after joining a loyalty scheme. One retailing study, however, 
using longitudinal data from a convenience store franchise, found 
that shoppers who were heavy buyers at the beginning of a loyalty 
programme did not change their patronage behaviour after joining. 
However, shoppers whose initial patronage levels were low or moderate 
gradually became more behaviourally loyal to the ﬁ  rm, increasing their 
shopping spend at the franchise. For light buyers, the loyalty programme 
encouraged shoppers to buy from additional categories, thus deepening 
their relationship with the franchise.  
23
   Whether or not they develop loyalty, these schemes certainly reward 
buying behaviour. Accumulated credits represent investments that the 
customer has made in the scheme or the brands behind the scheme. 
When customers get no return from this investment, they can be deeply 
distressed. Members of at least ﬁ  ve airline schemes, Braniff, Midway, 
MGM Grand, Legend and Ansett, lost their air miles when their airlines 
folded. Members of Pan Am’s FFP were fortunate to have their credits 
transferred into Delta Airlines when Pan Am stopped ﬂ  ying. Frequent 
ﬂ iers of Australia-based Ansett forfeited their miles after the airline 
stopped ﬂ ying in 2001. Passengers organized themselves into a group to 
lobby, ultimately unsuccessfully, for their loyalty to be recognized and 
rewarded by the company administrators, or prospective purchasers of 
the airline. 
  Additionally, loyalty schemes are successful enablers of customer 
insight. Personalized cards are obtained only after registering personal 
data. Then it becomes possible to monitor transactional behaviour. Chip-
embedded smart cards carry the information on the card itself. A huge 
a non-essential ‘ indulgent ’  item. Considering the results from the market research, the 
 ‘ Advantage Card ’  was targeted towards female customers, rewarding them with indulgent 
items instead of reducing the cost of their normal shopping. 
   Since inception the card has become the largest smart card-based retail loyalty card scheme 
in the world. It currently has over 13 million cardholders, and more than 40 per cent of 
transactions in-store are now linked to the card. 

===== PAGE 294 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer retention and development 271
amount of data is generated that can be warehoused and subjected to 
data mining for insights into purchasing behaviour. These insights can 
be used to guide marketing campaigns and offer development. Boots, for 
example, ran a series controlled experiments mailing health and beauty 
offers to select groups of carefully proﬁ led customers. It achieved 40 per 
cent response rates, in comparison to 5 per cent from the control group.  
24
   The loyalty scheme concept has been migrated into the online 
environment. One of the innovators, beenz, which was established in 
1998, has not survived. Other scheme brands include iPoints (see Figure 
9.4   ) and MyPoints. 
 Figure 9.4 
       www.ipoints.co.uk 
website     
    Customer clubs 
   Customer clubs have been established by many organizations. A 
customer club can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 A customer club is a company-run membership organization that 
offers a range of value-adding beneﬁ ts exclusively to members. 
   The initial costs of establishing a club can be quite high, but thereafter 
most clubs are expected to cover their operating expenses and, 
preferably, return a proﬁ  t. Research suggests that customer clubs are 
successful at promoting customer retention.  
25
  To become a member and obtain beneﬁ  ts, clubs require customers 
to register. With these personal details, the company is able to begin 

===== PAGE 295 =====
 
272 Customer Relationship Management
interaction with customers, learn more about them, and develop offers 
and services for them. Clubs can only succeed if members experience 
beneﬁ ts they value. Club managers can assemble and offer a range 
of value-adding services and products that, given the availability of 
customer data, can be personalized to segment or individual level. Among 
the more common beneﬁ  ts of club membership are access to member-
only products and services, alerts about upcoming new and improved 
products, discounts, magazines and special offers. For example, IKEA 
FAMILY, the home furnishing retailer’s club, offers members discounts on 
selected IKEA products, a free home furnishing magazine quarterly, news 
updates via e-mail and discounts on exclusive IKEA FAMILY products. 
   There are a huge number of customer clubs. One report estimates that 
there are  ‘ several hundreds ’  in Germany alone.  
26   B2C clubs include: 
●      Swatch the Club (see  www.swatch.com )  
●      The Pampers Parenting Institute (see  http://us.pampers.com /en_
US/ppi.do)
●      The Harley Owners’ Group (HOG) (see  http://www.harley-davidson.
com/wcm/Content/Pages/HOG/hog_selector.jsp?locale /H11005     en_US )
●      The Volkswagen Club (see  http:/ /www.vw-club.de/ ).    
   There are over a million paid-up members of the Harley Owners’ Group 
(see Figure 9.5   ), which was established in 1983. They choose from two 
levels of membership, full and associate, and a variable membership 
 Figure 9.5 
      Harley Owners ’  
Group    

===== PAGE 296 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer retention and development 273
length, from one year to lifetime. Among the many beneﬁ ts are roadside 
assistance, a membership manual, a touring handbook, a dedicated 
website, magazines, a mileage programme, a selection of pins and 
patches, membership in over 1000 chapters, invitations to events and 
rallies, and a lot more.  
    Sales promotions 
  Whereas loyalty schemes and clubs are relatively durable, sales promotions 
offer only temporary enhancements to customer value. Sales promotions, 
as we saw in the last chapter can also be used for customer acquisition. 
Retention-oriented sales promotions encourage the customer to repeat 
purchase, so the form they take is different. Here are some examples. 
●       In-pack or on-pack voucher:   customers buy the product and receive 
a voucher entitling them to a discount off one or more additional 
purchases.  
 Figure 9.6        Cash-back sales promotion    

===== PAGE 297 =====
 
274 Customer Relationship Management
●       Rebate or cash back:   rebates are refunds that the customer receives 
after purchase. The value of the rebate can be adjusted in line with 
the quantity purchased, in order to reward customers who meet high 
volume targets.  
●       Patronage awards:  customers collect proofs of purchase, such as store 
receipts or barcodes from packaging, which are surrendered for cash 
or gifts. The greater the volume purchased the bigger the award.  
●       Free premium for continuous purchase:  the customer collects several 
proofs of purchase and mails them in, or surrenders them at retail 
outlets to obtain a free gift. Sometimes the gift might be part of a 
collectable series. For example, a manufacturer of preserves and jams 
developed a range of collectable enamel badges. Customers collected 
proofs of purchase and mailed them in to receive a badge. There were 
20 different badges in the series. This promotion was so popular that 
a secondary market was established so that collectors could trade and 
swap badges to obtain the full set.  
●       Collection schemes:   these are long-running schemes where the 
customer collects items with every purchase. Kellogg’s ran a promotion 
in which they inserted picture cards of carefully chosen sports stars into 
packets of cereals. Customers didn’t know which card they had until 
they bought and opened the pack. These became collectable items. 
●       Self-liquidating premium:   a self-liquidating promotion is one that 
recovers its own direct costs. Typically, consumers are invited to 
collect proofs of purchase, and mail them in with a personal cheque 
or money order. This entitles the customer to buy a product at a 
discounted premium, such as a camera or gardening equipment. The 
promoter will have reached a deal with the suppliers of the products 
to buy in bulk at a highly discounted rate, perhaps on a sale or return 
basis. Margins earned from the sale of product, plus the value of the 
cheque or money order cover the costs of running the promotion 
which, as a consequence, becomes self-liquidating. 
    Bonding 
   The next positive customer retention strategy is customer bonding. 
B2B researchers have identiﬁ ed many different forms of bond between 
customers and suppliers. These include interpersonal bonds, technology 
bonds (as in EDI), legal bonds and process bonds. These different forms 
can be split into two major categories: social and structural.  27
    Social bonds 
   Social bonds are found in positive interpersonal relationships 
between people on both sides of the customer-supplier dyad. Positive 
interpersonal relationships are characterized by high levels of trust 
and commitment. Successful interpersonal relationships may take time 
to evolve, as uncertainty and distance are reduced. As the number 
of episodes linking customer and supplier grow, there is greater 
opportunity for social bonds to develop. Suppliers should understand 
that if they act opportunistically or fail to align themselves to customer 
preferences, trust and conﬁ dence will be eroded. 

===== PAGE 298 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer retention and development 275
   Strong social bonds can emerge between employees in companies 
having similar sizes, cultures and locations. For example, small and 
medium-sized businesses generally prefer to do business with similar 
sized companies, and Japanese companies prefer to do business with 
other Japanese companies. Geographic bonds emerge when companies 
in a trading area cooperate to support each other. 
   Social relationships between buyer and seller can be single or multi-
level. A single-level relationship might exist between the supplier’s 
account manager and the customer’s procurement ofﬁ  cer. The more 
interpersonal links there are between the dyad, the more resistant 
the relationship is to breakdown. For example, technical, quality and 
operations people talk to their equivalents on the other side. 
   Social bonds characterized by trust generally precede the development 
of structural bonds. Mutual investments in business relationships serve 
as structural bonds. These structural bonds can be formally recognized in 
an alliance or joint venture having legal status. Companies are unlikely 
to commit resources if there is a low level of trust in the partner’s 
integrity and competence.  
    Structural bonds 
  Structural bonds are established when companies and customers commit 
resources to a relationship. Generally, these resources yield mutual 
beneﬁ ts for the participants. For example, a joint customer-supplier 
quality team can work improving quality compliance, beneﬁ  ting both 
companies. Resources committed to a relationship may or may not be 
recoverable if the relationship breaks down. For example, investments 
made in training a customer’s operatives are non-returnable. On the other 
hand, a chilled products manufacturer that has installed refrigerated 
space at a distributor’s warehouse may be able to dismantle and retrieve 
it if the relationship dissolves. 
  A key feature of structural bonding is investment in adaptations to suit 
the other party. Suppliers can adapt any element of the offer – product, 
process, price and inventory levels, for example – to suit the customer. 
Customers, on the other hand, also make adaptations. For example, they 
can adapt their manufacturing processes to accommodate a supplier’s 
product or technology. 
  Power imbalances in relationships can produce asymmetric 
adaptations. A major multiple retailer might force adaptations from small 
suppliers, while making no concessions itself. For example, it could insist 
on a reduction in product costs, co-branding of point-of-sale material, or 
even attempt to coerce the supplier not to supply competitors. 
   Different types of structural bond can be identiﬁ  ed. All are 
characterized by an investment of one or both parties in the other: 
●       Financial:  where the seller offers a ﬁ  nancial inducement to retain the 
customer. Insurance companies form ﬁ nancial bonds with customers 
by offering no-claims discounts, tenure related discounts and multi-
policy discounts.  
●       Legal:  when there is a contract or common ownership linking the 
relational partners.  

===== PAGE 299 =====
 
276 Customer Relationship Management
●       Equity:  where both parties invest in order to develop an offer for 
customers. For example, the owners of airports invest in the shells of 
the duty-free retail outlets. The retailer invests in the internal ﬁ  xtures 
and ﬁ ttings.  
●       Knowledge-based:  when each party grows to know and understand 
the other’s processes and structures, strengths and weaknesses.  
●       Technological:  when the technologies of the relational partners are 
aligned, for example, with EDI, just-in-time logistics and manufacturing. 
●       Process:  when processes of the two organizations are aligned. For 
example, the quality assurance programme on the supplier side and the 
quality inspection programme on the customer side. Some suppliers 
manage inventory levels for their customers, ensuring inventory levels 
are optimized. This is known as vendor managed inventory (VMI). The 
chemicals company, Solvay Interox, uses telemetry systems to perform 
VMI for its customers. 
●       Values-based:  some companies are renowned for their strong values. 
Co-operative Bank is known for its pro-environment, ethical stance. It 
bonds closely with other companies, such as investment houses, that 
adopt the same position. It refuses to invest in companies that have 
poor environmental records.  
●       Geographic:  these bonds exist when companies in a trading area 
(street, city region or country) create a buyer–seller–referral network 
that supports all members of their group. In the UK, retailers in 
downtown Leamington Spa have combated out of town developments 
by creating a loyalty programme in which customers can collect and 
redeem loyalty credits at any member store.  
●       Project:  when the partners are engaged in some special activity 
outside of their normal commercial arrangements, for example, a 
new product development project. There may be an exchange of 
resources to enable the desired outcome to be achieved, for example, 
an exchange of engineers and technologists between the companies.  
●       Multi-product:  when a customer buys several products from a 
supplier, the bond is more difﬁ cult to break. There are economies for 
customers when they deal with fewer suppliers. When a relationship 
with a supplier of several products is dissolved, the customer may 
incur signiﬁ cant money, search and psychic costs in identifying one or 
more replacements. Further, the level of perceived risk attached to a 
new relationship may become uncomfortable.   
       Case 9.2   
  Customer retention at Korea Telecom      
   Korea Telecom places a high level of importance on creating valuable relationships with 
customers, both business and consumer, in the telecommunications markets of South Korea 
and South East Asia. 
   The organization places signiﬁ cant emphasis on maintaining high retention rates in markets 
which are becoming increasingly competitive. Korea Telecom estimates that it costs around 

===== PAGE 300 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer retention and development 277
  Social bonds are generally easier to break than structural bonds. 
Structural bonds link organizations. Social bonds link people. If the 
account manager and procurement ofﬁ cer do not grow to trust each other, 
they may fall out, but this is unlikely to bring down a joint venture. 
    Build customer engagement 
  The ﬁ nal positive strategy for building customer retention is to build 
customer engagement. Various studies have indicated that customer 
satisfaction is not enough to ensure customer longevity. For example, 
Reichheld reports that 65 to 85 per cent of recently defected customers 
claimed to be satisﬁ  ed with their previous suppliers. 
28   Another study 
reports that one in ten customers who said they were completely satisﬁ ed, 
scoring ten out of ten on a customer satisfaction scale, defected to a rival 
brand the following year.  29   Having satisﬁ ed customers is, increasingly, no 
more than a basic requirement of being in the game. 
   Highly engaged customers have levels of emotional or rational 
attachment or commitment to a brand, experience or organization that 
are so strong that they are highly resistant to competitive inﬂ  uence. 
The terms engagement, attachment and commitment tend to be used 
interchangeably to describe this phenomenon. The topic of customer 
engagement was introduced in Chapter 6.   
    Learning from research into 
customer commitment 
  A number of authorities have urged companies to work on developing 
customer commitment so that they develop a strong attachment to, or 
engagement with, a brand or company.  30
  Three different forms of commitment have been identiﬁ ed: instrumental, 
relational, and values-based. 31
    1 .       Instrumental commitment:  this occurs when customers are convinced 
that no other offer or company could do a better job of meeting their 
needs. They are not just very satisﬁ  ed, but unbeatably satisﬁ  ed. All 
expressed and latent needs have been met. When a customer feels 
that his or her bank has the best products, the best access, the best 
processes, the lowest interest rates on loans and the best reputation, 
he or she is committed.  
US$185 to gain a consumer for its broadband Internet service, and about two years for the 
organization to recover the cost. Consequently the organization undertakes a number of 
activities as part of its CRM strategy to retain customers, for example bundling together of a 
number of services such as Internet, mobile and home phone at a discount to customers who 
enter into service contracts for at least two years. 

===== PAGE 301 =====
 
278 Customer Relationship Management
   2 .       Relational commitment:  customers can become highly attached to a 
company’s people. An emotional tie may be formed with an individual 
person, a work group or the generalized company as a whole. 
Customers who talk about ‘ my banker ’  or  ‘ my mechanic ’  or  ‘ my 
builder ’  are expressing this attachment. They feel a sense of personal 
identiﬁ cation with that individual. Often, these are employees who 
 ‘ break the rules ’  or  ‘ go the extra mile ’  to completely satisfy customers. 
They are reliable, competent, empathic and responsive. When 
these employees recover an at-risk customer, they create a friend. 
Customer-focused organizations make heroes out of these individuals. 
They are feted and celebrated. For example, American Express tells 
the story of a customer service agent who responded to a call from a 
customer who had been robbed, by arranging to have replacement 
travellers checks delivered personally to the customer. The CSA also 
conﬁ rmed the customer’s hotel reservation, arranged for a car to 
collect the customer from the phone booth and notiﬁ  ed the police, 
all above and beyond the call of duty. Customers can also become 
attached to a work group. In banking, for example, some customers 
are highly committed to a speciﬁ  c branch and prefer not to transact 
elsewhere. Finally, customers can become attached to an organization 
as a whole, believing its people to be better than competitors on 
dimensions that are important to the customer. They may provide  ‘ the 
best service ’  or be  ‘ the friendliest people ’ . 
    3 .       Values-based commitment:  customers become committed when their 
values are aligned with those of the company. Values can be deﬁ  ned 
as follows: 
 Values are core beliefs that transcend context and serve to organize 
and direct attitudes and behaviours   
   Customers have many and varied core beliefs, such as environmental 
consciousness, honesty, child protection, independence, family-
centredness and so on. Many of these reﬂ  ect cultural norms. Where 
these values coincide with those of an organization, the customer may 
become committed to the organization. Companies that are accused 
of using child labour, damaging the environment or otherwise acting 
unethically place themselves at risk. Nestlé had been accused of 
marketing infant formula in African countries where the infrastructure 
made its use dangerous. Many babies died as mothers used unclean 
water and unsterilized equipment. This is estimated to have cost the 
company $40 million. 
32   Sales of Shell fuel were estimated to have 
fallen between 20 and 50 per cent during the Brent Spar boycott. 33   The 
company had planned to decommission the 4000 tonne Brent Spar oil 
platform by dumping it into the North Sea. Just as customers can take 
action against companies that they feel are in beach of their values, they 
can also commit to companies that mirror with their values. Research 
supports the claim that there is a hierarchical relationship from values, 
to attitudes, to purchase intention, and ultimately to purchase.  
34
  A number of companies beneﬁ t from values-based commitment: Body 
Shop, John Lewis, Harley Davidson, Co-operative Bank and Virgin. 

===== PAGE 302 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer retention and development 279
●       Body Shop International , the health and beauty retailer, was founded 
by Anita and Gordon Roddick. The company’s values include a refusal 
to source products tested on animals, and support for community 
trade, human rights and the environment. A successful and inﬂ uential 
business was developed on the back of these values. Body Shop 
inﬂ uenced other retailers to become more sensitive to these issues. 
●       The John Lewis Partnership   is a UK-based department store with 
a 140-year history. It is a mutual organization, owned by its staff 
and incorporated as a trust. Proﬁ  ts are not distributed to external 
shareholders; they are shared with employees who are regarded as 
partners. The company is reputed to look after these partners very 
well including, for example, having a ﬁ nal salary pension scheme.  
●       Harley Davidson , the US motorcycle manufacturer, has a phenomenally 
committed customer base. When Harley riders replace their bikes, 
95 per cent buy another Harley. The bike is a central part of a lifestyle 
that is grounded on fraternity, independence and rebellion. Image is 
critical to the Harley rider. In the US, the average age of a Harley rider is 
47 (up from 38 a decade ago), the median income is US$83 000 and the 
typical cruiser bike costs $17 000. The challenge of Harley is to develop 
value propositions that appeal to a younger customer. 
35
●       Co-operative Bank  is positioned in the UK retail banking market as 
the ethical bank. The mutually-owned bank believes its ethical stance 
is directly responsible for about 20 per cent of pre-tax proﬁ  ts. One-
third of the bank’s customers moved to the bank because of its ethical 
and eco-friendly policies.  36
●       The Virgin Group   is a family of over 200 privately owned 
strategic business units ranging from airline to rail, cosmetics, cola, 
telecommunications, music and ﬁ nancial services. In 2006 group sales 
reached £10 billion. The values of the Virgin brand are integrity, value 
for money, quality and fun. Virgin Group is chaired by its founder, 
the renegade but highly visible Sir Richard Branson. Customers are 
attracted to the brand because of its reputation for fairness, simplicity 
and transparency. Customers trust the brand and rely on it in markets 
that are new to them. For example, Virgin was a late mover into the 
UKs indexed linked mutual fund marketplace. It still managed to 
become market leader in 12 months, despite having no history as a 
ﬁ nancial institution. 
   Highly engaged customers are more involved with your brand or 
company. This not only implies frequent purchasing, but also other 
attributes of what might be called ‘ corporate citizenship ’ , such as being 
an unpaid advocate by uttering positive word-of-mouth, providing 
frequent feedback on their experiences, participating in company 
research, contributing to new product or service development, being 
more forgiving if the company makes a mistake or service fails, and 
participating in online communities and user groups. 
  The outcome of higher levels of engagement, it is claimed, is a more 
durable customer relationship. One report, for example, indicates that the 
rate of account closures at a bank were 37 per cent lower for emotionally 
engaged customers than for rationally satisﬁ ed customers. 
37

===== PAGE 303 =====
 
280 Customer Relationship Management
    Context makes a 
difference 
   Context makes a difference to customer retention in two ways. First, 
there are some circumstances when customer acquisition makes more, 
indeed the only, sense as a strategic goal. Secondly, customer retention 
strategies will vary according to the environment in which the company 
competes.
  When launching a new product or opening up a new market a 
company’s focus has to be on customer acquisition. In contexts where there 
are one-off purchases such as funerals, infrequent purchases such as heart 
surgery, or unique conditions such as gave rise to the demand for Y2K 
compliance software, customer retention is subordinate to acquisition. 
   The impact of contextual conditions on the choice and timing of 
customer retention practices has not been thoroughly researched. 
However, we can see that a number of contextual considerations impact 
on customer retention practices: 
●       Number of competitors:   in some industries there is a notable lack 
of competitors, meaning that companies do not suffer badly from 
customer churn. This typically applies in state-provided services 
such as education and utilities such as gas, electricity, rail and 
telecommunications, whether deregulated or not. When customers 
are dissatisﬁ ed they have no competitor to turn to. They may also 
believe that the competitors in the market are not truly differentiated 
by their service standards. In other words, each supplier is as bad as 
the others. The result is inertia.  
●       Corporate culture:   in corporate banking, the short-term proﬁ  t 
requirement of both management and shareholders has resulted in a 
lack of genuine commitment to relationship banking. Banks have been 
very opportunistic in their preference for transactional credit-based 
relationships with customers.  38
●       Channel conﬁ  guration:  sellers may not have the opportunity to 
maintain direct relationships with the ultimate buyers and users 
of their products. Instead, they may rely on their intermediaries. 
Caterpillar, for example, does not have a relationship with the 
contractors who use their equipment. Instead, it works in partnership 
with about 1500 independent dealers around the world to provide 
customer service, training, ﬁ eld support and inventories of spare parts.  
●       Purchasing practices:  the purchasing procedures adopted by buyers 
can also make the practice of customer retention futile. Customers 
do not always want relationships with their suppliers. For example, 
towards the end of the 1990s, government departments in the UK 
and elsewhere adopted compulsory competitive tendering (CCT) 
as their mechanism for making purchasing decisions. The process is 
designed to prevent corrupt relationships developing and to ensure 
that tax-payers get good value for money, i.e. pay a low price for 
the services rendered. Every year or so, current suppliers and other 

===== PAGE 304 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer retention and development 281
vendors are invited to pitch for the business. Price is often the primary 
consideration for the choice of supplier.  
●       Ownership expectations:   the demands of business owners can 
subordinate customer retention to other goals. For example, Korean 
ofﬁ ce equipment manufacturers are very focused on sales volumes. 
They require their wholly-owned overseas distributors to buy quotas 
of product from Korea and sell them in the served market, regardless 
of whether the products are well-matched to local market conditions 
and customer requirements. The distributors are put in a position of 
having to create demand against competitors that do a better job of 
understanding and meeting customer requirements.  
39
●       Ethical concerns:   public sector medical service providers cannot 
simply focus on their most proﬁ  table customers or products. This 
would result in the neglect of some patients and a failure to address 
other areas of disease management. Private sector providers do not 
necessarily face this problem. The Shouldice Hospital in Ontario 
specializes in hernia repairs. Their website,  www.shouldice.com , 
reports that they have repaired 300 000 hernias over a 60 year period, 
with a 99 per cent success rate. They even organize annual reunions. 
Recently, these events have been attended by 1000 satisﬁ ed patients. 
    Key performance indicators 
of customer retention 
programmes
   CRM practitioners are concerned with achieving a number of key 
performance indicators (KPIs) for these customer retention activities, 
among them: 
●      raw customer retention rate 
●      raw customer retention rate in each customer segment  
●      sales-adjusted retention rate  
●      sales-adjusted retention rate in each customer segment  
●      p r o ﬁ t-adjusted retention rate  
●      p r o ﬁ t-adjusted retention rate in each customer segment  
●      cost of customer retention  
●      share of wallet of the retained customers  
●      customer churn rate per product category, sales region or channel  
●      cost-effectiveness of customer retention tactics. 
   The choice of KPI will vary according to context. Some companies do not 
have enough data to compute raw retention rate per segment. Others 
may not know their share of wallet (share of customer spending on the 
category).

===== PAGE 305 =====
 
282 Customer Relationship Management
    The role of research 
   Companies can reduce levels of customer churn by researching a number 
of questions: 
    1.     Why are customers churning? 
    2.     Are there any lead indicators of impending defection? 
    3.     What can be done to address the root causes? 
   The ﬁ rst question can be answered by contacting and investigating a 
sample of former customers to ﬁ  nd out why they took their business 
elsewhere. 
  Customers defect for all sort of reasons, not all of which can be foreseen, 
prevented or managed by a company. For example, Susan Keaveney 
identiﬁ ed eight causes of switching behaviours in service industries 
generally: price, inconvenience, core service failures, failed employee 
responses to service failure, ethical problems, involuntary factors, 
competitive issues and service encounter failures. Only six of these eight 
causes of switching behaviours can be inﬂ uenced by the service provider. 
40
Another industry-speciﬁ c study found that between 20 per cent and 25 per 
cent of supermarket shoppers changed their primary store in a 12 month 
period. Twenty-four per cent of switchers changed allegiance because a 
new competitive store had opened, 14 per cent because they had moved 
house, 11 per cent for better quality and 10 per cent for better choice. 41
  The second question attempts to ﬁ  nd out if customers give any early 
warning signals of impending defection. If these were identiﬁ ed the company 
could take pre-emptive action. Signals might include the following: 
●      reduced RFM scores (recency–frequency–monetary value) 
●      non-response to a carefully targeted offer  
●      reduced levels of customer satisfaction 
●      dissatisfaction with complaint handling 
●      reduced share of customer (e.g. customer only ﬂ  ies one leg of an 
international ﬂ ight on your airline)  
●      inbound calls for technical or product-related information  
●      late payment of an invoice 
●      querying an invoice 
●      customer touchpoints are changed, e.g. store closes, change of website 
address  
●      customer change of address.    
  Customer researchers are also advised to analyse the reasons for 
customer defection, and to identify the root causes. 42   Sometimes these can 
be remedied by management. For example, if you lose customers because 
of the time taken to deal with a complaint, management can audit and 
overhaul the complaints management process. This might involve 
identifying the channels and touchpoints through which complaints enter 
the business, updating complaints database management, or training and 
empowering frontline staff. Root causes can be analysed by customer 

===== PAGE 306 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer retention and development 283
segment, channel and product. The 80:20 rule may be applicable. In 
other words, it may be possible to eliminate 80 per cent of the causes of 
customer defections with relative ease. 
    Strategies for customer 
development
  Customer development is the process of growing the value of retained 
customers. Companies generally attempt to cross-sell and up-sell products 
into the customer base while still having regard for the satisfaction of the 
customer. Cross-selling, which aims to grow share of wallet can be deﬁ ned 
as follows: 
 Cross-selling is selling additional products and services to an 
existing customer. 
   Up-selling can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
   Up-selling is selling higher priced or higher margin products and 
services to an existing customer. 
  Customers generally do not respond positively to persistent and repeated 
efforts to sell additional products and services that are not related to their 
requirements. Indeed, there is an argument that companies should seek 
to down-sell where appropriate. This means identifying and providing 
lower cost solutions to the customers ’  problems, even if it means making 
a lower margin. Customers may regard up-selling as opportunistic and 
exploitative, thereby reducing the level of trust they have in the supplier, 
and putting the relationship at risk. However, multi-product ownership 
creates a structural bond that decreases the risk of relationship 
dissolution. There are a number of CRM technologies that are useful for 
customer development purposes. 
●       Campaign management  software is used to create up-sell and cross-
sell customer development campaigns and track their effectiveness, 
particularly in terms of sales and incremental margin.  
●       Event-based marketing:  campaigns are often associated with events. 
For example, a bank will offer a customer an investment product if 
deposits in a savings account reach a trigger point.  
●       Data mining:  offers are based on intelligent data mining. Transactional 
histories record what customers have already bought. Data 
mining can tell you the probability of a customer buying any other 
products (propensity to buy), based on their transactional history or 
demographic/psychographic proﬁ le. First Direct, the Internet and 
telephone bank, uses propensity to buy scores to run targeted, event-
driven cross-sell campaigns through direct mail and call centres. They 
aim at high conversion rates through follow-up calls. 

===== PAGE 307 =====
 
284 Customer Relationship Management
●       Customization:  offers are customized at segment or unique customer 
level. Also personalized is the communication to the customer and the 
channel of communication: e-mail, surface mail, SMS or phone call, 
for example.  
●       Channel integration:  customer development activities are integrated 
across channels. It is regarded as bad customer management practice 
to have different channels making different offers to the same 
customer. In retail, channel integration is observed when channels 
such as stores, web and direct to consumer channels act in an 
integrated, customer-centric manner. For this to happen, customer 
information and customer development plans need to be shared 
across channels.  
●       Integrated customer communications:   the messages communicated 
to customers are consistent across all channels.  
●       Marketing optimization:   optimization software is available from 
CRM analytics organizations such as SAS. Optimization enables 
marketers to enjoy optimal returns from up-sell and cross-sell 
campaigns across multiple channels and customer segments, taking 
account of issues such as budget constraints, communication costs, 
contact policies (e.g. no more than two offers to be communicated to 
any customer in any quarter), customers ’  transactional histories and 
propensities to buy.    
  In professional services, the client audit is often the foundation for 
cross-selling and up-selling of clients. In B2B environments, sales 
representatives need to be alert to opportunities for cross- and up-
selling. This means understanding customers ’  manufacturing processes, 
and knowing their product innovation plans. 
  In mature markets, where customer acquisition is difﬁ  cult or 
expensive, the development of retained customers is an important 
source of additional revenues. For example, in the mature mobile 
telecommunications market, the penetration of handsets is at a very high 
level. Winning new-to-market customers is regarded as too difﬁ cult, since 
these are the laggards and expensive to convert. Network operators have 
begun to focus on selling additional services to their existing customer 
bases, including data applications. 
    Strategies for terminating 
customer relationships 
   Companies rarely hesitate to terminate employee positions that serve 
no useful purpose. In a similar vein, a review of customer value might 
identify customers that are candidates for dismissal, including customers 
who will never be proﬁ  table or who serve no other useful strategic 
purpose. More speciﬁ  cally, these include fraudsters, persistent late 
payers, serial complainants, those who are capricious and change their 

===== PAGE 308 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer retention and development 285
minds with cost consequences for the supplier, and switchers who are 
constantly searching for a better deal. This certainly happens in reverse; 
customers sack suppliers when they switch vendors. 
  Relationships dissolve when one partner no longer views the 
relationship as worth continuing investment. In a B2B context, activity 
links, resource ties and actor bonds would be severed. However, even if 
there is no strategic value in a customer, dissolution of the relationship 
is not always an attractive option because of contractual obligations, 
expectations of mutuality, word-of-mouth risks and network relationships. 
   McKinsey reports that 30 to 40 per cent of a typical company’s 
revenues are generated by customers who, on a fully costed, standalone, 
basis would be unproﬁ  table.  
43   It is therefore important to conduct 
regular reviews of the customer base to identify potential candidates for 
dismissal. If this is not done sales, marketing and service resources will 
continue to be suboptimally deployed. Nypro, a large plastic injection 
moulder, had 800 customers and sales of $50 million in 1987 when it 
decided to move out of low value-add manufacturing. Many of these 
customers served no useful strategic purpose and, by 1997, the company 
had only 65 customers, all of whom were large and required value-
added solutions rather than cheap moulded products. However, sales 
revenues were $450 million. 
   Sacking customers needs to be conducted with sensitivity. Customers 
may be well connected and spread negative word-of-mouth about their 
treatment. In the year 2000, UK banks began a programme of branch 
closures in geographic areas that were unproﬁ  table. Effectively, they 
were sacking low-value customers in working-class and rural areas. 
There was considerable bad publicity, the government intervened and 
the closure strategy was reviewed.
       Case 9.3   
  Sacking unproﬁ table customers at the CBA      
   The Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA), like many other banks, has been criticized in 
the media for adopting a strategy of sacking unproﬁ table customers. 
   In recent years the bank has closed branches in many areas that were considered 
unproﬁ table, particularly in less populated areas of rural and regional Australia. The bank 
believes customers are unproﬁ table if their balance is less than $500. For these customers the 
bank has introduced higher bank fees. The bank has also introduced transaction fees of up to 
$3 when customers withdraw their money over the counter in a branch. 
   The media has widely speculated that actions such as these by many banks will continue 
to occur as banks and other ﬁ  nancial institutions attempt to shift customers to electronic 
banking channels, where the cost to the bank of performing a simple deposit or withdrawal 
transaction can be just a few cents as opposed to a few dollars for similar over-the-counter 
service in a branch. 

===== PAGE 309 =====
 
286 Customer Relationship Management
   There are a number of strategies for sacking customers: 
●       Raise prices:   customers can choose to pay the higher price. If not, 
they effectively remove themselves from the customer base. Where 
price is customized this is a feasible option. When banks introduced 
transaction fees for unproﬁ  table customers many left in search of a 
better deal.  
●       Unbundle the offer:   you could take a bundled value proposition, 
unbundle it, reprice the components and reoffer it to the customer. 
This makes the value in the offer transparent, and enables customers 
to make informed choices about whether they want to pay the 
unbundled price.  
●       Respecify the product:   this involves redesigning the product so that 
it no longer appeals to the customer(s) you want to sack. For example, 
the airline BA made a strategic decision to target frequent-ﬂ  ying 
business travellers who they regarded as high value. They redesigned 
the cabins in their ﬂ  eet, reducing the number of seats allocated to 
economy travellers.  
●       Reorganize sales, marketing and service departments  so that they no 
longer focus on the sackable segments or customers. You would stop 
running marketing campaigns targeted at these customers, prevent 
salespeople calling on them and discontinue servicing their queries.  
●       Introduce ABC class service:  you could migrate customers down the 
service ladder from high quality face-to-face service from account 
teams, to sales representatives, or even further to contact centre or 
web-based self-service. This eliminates cost from the relationship 
and may convert an unproﬁ  table customer into proﬁ  t. In a B2C 
context, this equates to shifting customers from a high-cost to a low-
cost service channel. Frontier Bank, for example, introduced a no-
frills telephone account for business customers who needed no cash 
processing facilities. A minimum balance was needed for the bank to 
cover its operating costs. Customers who did not maintain the targeted 
credit balance in their account were invited to switch to other products 
in other channels. If they refused, the bank asked them to close their 
account.
44
   Empirical evidence on how companies terminate customer relationships 
is sparse. However, one study of German engineering companies 
reports that very few ﬁ  rms have a systematic approach to managing 
unproﬁ table customers. Most respondents conﬁ  rm that unproﬁ  table 
relationships are commonplace; indeed, a ﬁ fth of ﬁ rms have a customer 
base more than half of which is not, or not yet, proﬁ table. Companies fall 
into three clusters in respect of the customer-sacking behaviours:  
45
    1 .       Hardliners  take an active and rigorous stance in terminating 
unproﬁ table relationships, including the regular clearance of their 
customer portfolio. More qualitative implications, such as a potential 
loss of trust in relationships with other customers or negative word-
of-mouth, do not seem to hinder their willingness to sack unproﬁ table 
customers.

===== PAGE 310 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer retention and development 287
    Summary 
   In this chapter we have looked at the important issues of how companies can retain, 
develop and, if necessary, sack customers. The economic argument for focusing on 
customer retention is based on four claims about what happens as customer tenure 
lengthens: the volume and value of purchasing increases, customer management costs 
fall, referrals increase and customers become less price sensitive. Measures of customer 
retention vary across industry because of the length of the customer repurchase cycle. 
There are three possible measures of customer retention. Raw customer retention is 
the number of customers doing business with a ﬁ  rm at the end of a trading period, 
expressed as percentage of those who were active customers at the beginning of the 
same period. This raw ﬁ  gure can be adjusted for sales and proﬁ  t. Customer retention 
efforts are generally directed at customers who are strategically valuable. These same 
customers may be very attractive to competitors and may be costly to retain. 
   A number of alternative strategies can be used to retain customers. A distinction 
can be made between positive and negative retention strategies. Negative retention 
strategies impose switching costs on customers if they defect. Positive retention strategies 
reward customers for staying. There are four main forms of positive retention strategy. 
These are meeting and exceeding customer expectations, ﬁ  nding ways to add value, 
creating social and structural bonds and building customer engagement. Companies have 
a number of methods for adding value, including loyalty schemes, customer clubs and 
sales promotions. What is an appropriate customer retention strategy will be contextually 
deﬁ ned. Not all strategies work in all circumstances. In addition to customer retention, 
two other customer management activities were discussed in this chapter. These are 
developing and sacking customers. Customer development aims to increase the value of 
the customer by cross-selling or up-selling products and services to existing customers. 
The termination of customer relationships aims to improve the proﬁ  tability of the 
customer base by divesting customers who show no signs of ever becoming proﬁ table or 
strategically signiﬁ cant.   
    2 .       Appeasers  take a more cautious approach concerning the termination 
of unproﬁ table relationships, above all due to strategic considerations 
such as not playing customers into competitors ’  hands.  
    3.     The  undecided  are reluctant to terminate unproﬁ  table relationships, 
mainly because they fear the costs of attracting new customers. 
  References  
       1.         Research conducted in Australia indicates that less than 40 per cent 
of companies had a customer retention plan in place. See Ang, L. 
and Buttle, F. (2006) Customer retention management processes: a 
quantitative study. European Journal of Marketing , Vol. 40(1–2), pp. 
83–99.

===== PAGE 311 =====
 
288 Customer Relationship Management
       2.         Weinstein, A. (2002) Customer retention: a usage segmentation 
and customer value approach. Journal of Targeting, Measurement 
and Analysis for Marketing , Vol. 10(3), pp. 259–68; Payne, A.F.T. and 
Frow, P . (1999) Developing a segmented service strategy: improving 
measurement in relationship marketing. Journal of Marketing 
Management, Vol. 15(8), pp. 797–818. 
       3.         This section is based on Ahmad, R. and Buttle F. (2001) Customer 
retention: a potentially potent marketing management strategy. 
Journal of Strategic Marketing, Vol. 9, pp. 29–45. 
       4.         Dawkins, P .M. and Reichheld, F.F. (1990) Customer retention as a 
competitive weapon, Directors  &  Board, Summer, pp. 42–47. 
       5.          Ahmad ,    R.   and   Buttle ,    F.                ( 2002 )        Customer retention management, a 
reﬂ ection on theory and practice .             Marketing Intelligence and Planning        ,   
 Vol. 20      ( 3 )       , pp.  149  –       161        .  
       6.          Reichheld ,    F.F.             ( 1996 )        The loyalty effect: the hidden force behind growth, 
proﬁ ts, and lasting value             .  Boston        MA: Harvard Business School Press              .  
       7.         Coyles, S. and Gorkey, T.C. (2002) Customer retention is not enough. 
McKinsey Quarterly, No 2, pp. 80–89. 
       8.         Based on Reichheld, F.F. and Sasser, W.E. Jr (1990) Zero defections: 
quality comes to services. Harvard Business Review , September–
October, pp. 105–111; Reichheld, F.F. (1996) The loyalty effect . Boston: 
Harvard Business School Press. 
       9.          Murphy ,    J.A.             ( 1996 )       Retail Banking .        In:           Buttle F.  (ed.)             Relationship
marketing: theory and practice          .  London :       Paul Chapman Publishing      , pp. 
 7 4   –        9 0         .   
      10.          East ,    R.   and   Hammond ,    K.             ( 2000 )       Fact and fallacy in retention 
marketing, Working paper            .  Kingston Business School : UK                    .   
      11.         Bain  &  Co/Mainline. (1999) Consumer spending online. Bain  &  Co.      
      12.         East, R. and Hammond, K. (2000) Fact and fallacy in retention 
marketing. Working paper, Kingston Business School, UK. Reichheld 
(1996, op.cit.) shows proﬁ t from customer referrals grows as tenure 
lengthens.
      13.         Dawkins, P . M. and Reichheld, F. F. (1990) Customer retention as a 
competitive weapon, Directors  &  Board, Summer, pp. 42–47. 
      14.          Reichheld ,    F.F.             ( 1996 )        The loyalty effect: the hidden force behind growth, 
proﬁ ts, and lasting value             .  Boston        MA: Harvard Business School Press              .  
      15.          Bolton ,    R.N.                ( 1998 )        A dynamic model of the duration of the 
customer’s relationship with a continuous service provider: the role 
of satisfaction .             Marketing Science       ,  Vol. 17      ( 1 )       , pp.  45  –       65        .  
      16.          Kano ,    N.             ( 1995 )       Upsizing the organization by attractive quality 
creation .        In:       G.H.     Kanji  (ed.)       .      Total Quality Management: Proceedings of 
the First World Congress          .  London :       Chapman  &  Hall              .  
      17.          Gilbert ,    D.             ( 1996 )       Airlines .        In:       Buttle F.       (ed.)             Relationship marketing, 
theory and practice          .  London :       Paul Chapman Publishing      , pp.  31  –       144        .  
      18.          Dowling ,    G.   and   Uncles ,    M.                ( 1997 )        Do customer loyalty programs 
really work?             Sloan Management Review, Summer        ,  Vol. 38      ( 4 )       , 
p p . 7 1   –        8 2         .   
      19.         Dignam, C. (1996) Being smart is not the only redeeming feature. 
Marketing Direct, September, pp. 51–56. 

===== PAGE 312 =====
 
Managing the customer lifecycle: customer retention and development 289
      20.          Quoted in Gilbert ,    D.             ( 1996 )       Airlines .        In:       Buttle F.       (ed.)             Relationship
marketing: theory and practice          .  London :       Paul Chapman Publishing      , pp. 
 31  –       144        .  
      21.          Reed ,    D.                ( 1995 )        Many happy returns .            Marketing Week, November       ,   1 7          ,  
p p . 7   –        1 1         .   
      22.          Dick ,    A.S.   and   Basu ,    K.                ( 1994 )        Customer loyalty: towards an 
integrated framework .             Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science        ,   
 Vol. 22      ( 2 )       , pp.  99  –       113        .  
      23.          Liu ,    Y.                ( 2007 )        The long-term impact of loyalty programs on consumer 
purchase behaviour and loyalty .            Journal of Marketing       ,  Vol. 71         , October, 
p p . 1 9   –        3 5         .   
      24.         For more information on the history and development of these 
schemes see Worthington, S. (2000) A classic example of a misnomer: 
the loyalty card. Journal of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for 
Marketing, Vol. 8(3), pp. 222–234. 
      25.          Stauss ,    B.  ,   Chojnacki ,    K.  ,   Decker ,    A.   and   Hoffmann ,    F.                ( 2001 ) 
       Retention effects of a customer club .             International Journal of Service 
Industry Management       ,  Vol. 12      ( 1 )       , pp.  7  –       19        .  
      26.          Stauss ,    B.  ,   Chojnacki ,    K.  ,   Decker ,    A.   and   Hoffmann ,    F.                ( 2001 ) 
       Retention effects of a customer club .             International Journal of Service 
Industry Management       ,  Vol. 12      ( 1 )       , pp.  7  –       19        .  
      27.          Buttle ,    F.  ,   Ahmad ,    R.   and   Aldlaigan ,    A.                ( 2002 )        The theory and 
practice of customer bonding .  Journal of Business-to-Business 
Marketing       ,  Vol. 9      ( 2 )       , pp.  3  –       27        .  
      28.          Reichheld ,    F.F.                ( 1993 )        Loyalty-based management .            Harvard Business 
Review, March–April             , pp.  63  –       73        .  
      29.          Mitchell ,    A.                ( 1998 )        Loyal yes, staying no .            Management Today, May             , pp. 
 104  –       105        .
      30.         Hofmeyr, N. and Rice, B. (2000) Commitment-led marketing. New York: 
John Wiley; Ulrich, D. (1989) Tie the corporate knot: gaining complete 
customer commitment. Sloan Management Review, Summer, pp. 19–27. 
      31.         Aldlaigan, A. (2000) Service quality, organizational attachment 
and relational intention in retail banking. Unpublished PhD thesis. 
Manchester Business School, UK. 
      32.          Nelson-Horchler ,    J.                ( 1984 )        Fighting a boycott, image rebuilding, 
Swiss style .             Industry Week       ,  Vol. 220         , pp.  54  –       56        .  
      33.          Klein ,    N.             ( 2000 )        No Logo             .  Harper Collins :       London              .  
      34.          Follows ,    S.B.   and   Jobber ,    D.                ( 2000 )        Environmentally responsible 
purchase behaviour a test of a consumer model .            European Journal of 
Marketing       ,  Vol. 34      ( 5–6 )       , pp.  723  –       746        .  
      35.          Helyar ,    J.                ( 2002 )        Will Harley-Davidson hit the wall?             Fortune, Vol. 
146(3), August 12    , pp. 120  –     124        .  
      36.          Croft ,    J.                ( 2002 )        Ethics proves big draw for Co-op Bank .         Financial
Times London, May 15       , p.  20           .  
      37.          Fleming ,    J.H.   and   Asplund ,    J.             ( 2007 )        Human Sigma, managing the 
employee-customer encounter             .  New York :       Gallup Press              .  
      38.          Schell ,    C.             ( 1996 )       Corporate banking .        In:           Buttle F.  (ed.)             Relationship
marketing theory and practice           .  London :       Paul Chapman Publishing      , pp. 
 91  –       103        .  

===== PAGE 313 =====
 
290 Customer Relationship Management
      39.          Ahmad ,    R.   and   Buttle ,    F.                ( 2002 )        Customer retention management, a 
reﬂ ection on theory and practice .             Marketing Intelligence and Planning        ,  
Vol.  20      ( 3 )       , pp.  149  –       161        .  
      40.          Keaveney ,    S.M.                ( 1995 )        Customer switching behaviour in service 
industries: an exploratory study .            Journal of Marketing        ,  Vol. 59         , 
p p . 7 1   –        8 2         .   
      41.          East ,    R.  ,   Harris ,    P .  ,   Lomax ,    W.  ,   Willson ,    G.   and   Hammond ,    K.                ( 1998 ) 
       Customer defection from supermarkets .            Advances in Consumer 
Research       ,  Vol. 25      ( 1 )       , pp.  507  –       512        .  
      42.          Hart ,    C.W.L.  ,   Heskett ,    J.L.   and   Sasser ,    W.E.     Jr                ( 1990 )        The proﬁ table art 
of service recovery .             Harvard Business Review, July–August             , pp.  148  –       156        .  
      43.          Leszinski ,    R.  ,   Weber ,    F.A.  ,   Paganoni ,    R.   and   Baumgartner ,    T.                ( 1995 ) 
       P r o ﬁ ts in your backyard .            The McKinsey Quarterly       ,  No. 4         , p.  118           .  
      44.          Ahmad ,    R.   and   Buttle ,    F.                ( 2002 )        Retaining telephone banking 
customers at Frontier Bank .  International Journal of Bank Marketing        ,   
 Vol. 20      ( 1 )       , pp.  5  –       16        .  
      45.          Helm ,    S.  ,   Rolfes ,    L.   and   Günter ,    B.                ( 2006 )        Suppliers ’  willingness to 
end unproﬁ table customer relationships: an exploratory investigation 
in the German mechanical engineering sector .            European Journal of 
Marketing       ,  Vol. 40      ( 3–4 )       , pp.  366  –       383        .       

===== PAGE 314 =====
 
               Managing networks for 
customer relationship 
management
performance  
 Chapter 10 

===== PAGE 315 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 316 =====
 
           Chapter objectives      
   By the end of this chapter, you will understand: 
    1.   the meaning and composition of a business network  
    2.   how networks contribute to the achievement of CRM objectives  
    3.   the meaning of network position and network competence  
    4.   the SCOPE network model of CRM  
    5.   that network management is about both managing in networks and management 
of networks         
    Introduction 
  This chapter focuses on networks and their inﬂ uence on CRM. Companies 
do not exist in splendid isolation. They are positioned within a network, 
and it is the performance of that network which determines whether 
companies achieve their goals. CRM performance is more assured when 
the resources of the network are aligned and coordinated to contribute to 
the creation and delivery of value to the focal company’s customers. 
   Our deﬁ nition of CRM, repeated below, recognizes the role of the 
business network in the achievement of CRM outcomes. 
 CRM is the core business strategy that integrates internal processes 
and functions and external networks   to create and deliver value 
to targeted customers at a proﬁ  t. It is grounded on high-quality 
customer-related data and enabled by information technology. 
   Competition for the customer’s spend is changing. In the past, 
competition has been head to head between independent companies. 
Today, competition is increasingly between networks. A good illustration 
of this is the motor industry. In the 1920s Ford not only assembled cars, 
they also owned steel mills, coal mines, iron ore mines, steam ships, 
rubber plantations, sheep farms and railroads. It was standard practice 
for companies to own and manage as many factors of production that 
they could. Today it is different. In the year 2000, Ford only produced 
about 50 per cent of the value of their cars. The rest was outsourced to 
members of their supplier network. In Ford’s strategic group, General 
Motors produces 70 per cent of the value of its cars, Chrysler 30 per cent 
and Toyota only 20 per cent. 
   Conventionally it has been the manufacturer or service provider that 
dominates business networks through their brand power. Companies 
like IBM, GE (General Electric), UPS (United Parcel Service) and 
AMP (Australian Mutual Provident) are examples. This is changing. 
Sometimes the members of the supply chain can be so powerful that they 
call the shots. Intel and Microsoft carry so much weight that computer 

===== PAGE 317 =====
 
294 Customer Relationship Management
manufacturers such as Dell, Toshiba and Compaq take great risks if these 
components are not part of the ﬁ nished product. 
   Members of the demand chain can also wield signiﬁ  cant power 
and inﬂ  uence. A high percentage of sales in some retail categories are 
retailer brands (own brands). Wal-Mart and Tesco both specify precisely 
what they require from their own brand manufacturers. Sometimes 
manufacturers have a role in helping determine the speciﬁ  cation, but 
ultimately it is clear where the ﬁ  nal decision rests: with the retailer. 
Multiple retailers also have sufﬁ  cient power to expect compliance from 
manufacturers of major brands. Even Procter and Gamble, Unilever and 
General Foods are not exempt from their inﬂ  uence. Wal-Mart, however, 
does claim to want closer relationships based on open dialogue and 
information exchange with key vendors (see Case 10.1).
       Case 10.1   
  Wal-Mart’s commitments to key vendors      
   Wal-Mart makes a number of commitments to major suppliers with whom it wants to 
develop partner-like relationships. 
●      Wal-Mart looks for a very close relationship and strong commitment from its key vendors. 
Highly valued qualities are trust and integrity.  
●      Wal-Mart is willing to listen to new solutions, opinions and ideas. Don’t be afraid to 
contribute.
●      Analytical skills are essential when dealing with Wal-Mart. We will give you access to all 
kinds of data. Use the data to build a win–win relationship.  
●      Wal-Mart is hungry for consumer insight. We place great value on any information that 
can improve our understanding of the people who shop in Wal-Mart stores.  
●      Prepare to engage management. Wal-Mart management is as keen as anyone to hear what 
business partners have to say. Don’t feel bound by hierarchy or categories. 
    What is a network? 
   The term  ‘ network ’  can, in general terms, be thought of as a structure 
made up of nodes that are related to each other by threads.  Figure 10.1    
shows the nodes and threads of a simpliﬁ  ed social network, that is, 
a group of friends and acquaintances. The nodes are the ovals and the 
lines joining them are the threads. The nodes are people (lettered A to L) 
and the threads are the social links between them. This network has been 
drawn from the perspective of person A. She is a very well-connected 
person. Persons B to I are all connected to A by direct threads. One step 
removed from person A is person K. A does not know K personally, but 
she knows persons I and J, both of whom know K. K knows L, who is 
two steps removed from A. Where does A’s network ﬁ  nish? Clearly, 
the answer is ‘ not at the edge of the diagram ’ . Each of the people with 

===== PAGE 318 =====
 
Managing networks for customer relationship management performance 295
whom A is directly connected has relationships with other people, many 
of whom are not shown on this diagram. They in turn have connections 
with others, and so on. Person A’s network, in principle, contains all her 
direct connections, their direct connections, and their direct connections, 
and their direct connections, and their  …   ad inﬁ nitum . Network analysts 
tend to draw boundaries around networks to make them more visible 
and amendable to analysis.  
A
H
G
E
DB
CL
K
I
J
F
 Figure 10.1 
      A network    
    Business networks 
   Business networks exist. They are unavoidable. They are a fact of 
business life whether they are actively coordinated or not. A business 
network can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 A business network is made up of nodal companies, organizations 
and individuals, and the relationships between them. 
  In the context of business markets, these nodes are business units such 
as suppliers, producers, distributors, partners, regulators, contractors, 
customers and other companies, organizations and individuals. The 
relationships between these business units are expressed in actor bonds, 
activity links and resource ties. To recap material that was introduced 
in Chapter 2, actor bonds are interpersonal contacts between people 
in network-related ﬁ  rms; activity links are the commercial, legal, 

===== PAGE 319 =====
 
296 Customer Relationship Management
administrative and other connections that form between companies 
as they interact; resources are the human, ﬁ  nancial, legal, physical, 
managerial, intellectual and other strengths or weaknesses of ﬁ rms in the 
network.
   Intercompany and interpersonal relationships within a network 
form a complex social structure. This happens in many ways. Equity 
stakes in companies make for complex patterns of ownership and 
inﬂ uence. Company A has a stake in company B; company B has a 
stake in companies A and C. Company C has stakes in companies A 
and D. Directors have multiple memberships of network companies ’
boards. Marketers meet up at branch meetings of their professional 
organizations. Salespeople organize social events for their key account 
holders. Personal relationships contribute to the atmosphere of a 
business relationship, making it close or distant, friendly or antagonistic, 
open or closed. Established interpersonal relationships both enable and 
constrain the development of other interpersonal relationships. 
  Any ﬁ rm participates in a host of different relationships, and the 
ﬁ rms with which it has relationships also have relationships with other 
ﬁ rms. Therefore, any one ﬁ  rm occupies a position within a network of 
other ﬁ rms. Each ﬁ rm in a network is likely to have its own picture of 
the network, which may be very different from other ﬁ  rms in the same 
network. Each ﬁ rm tries to exert some inﬂ  uence over signiﬁ  cant parts 
of its network, for example to ensure that manufacturing inputs are 
available and customer demand is constant. Some research has suggested 
that the average ﬁ  rm has ten such strategically important network 
relationships.  
1
    Network position 
   Every company occupies a network position. Network positions are the 
products of an organization’s past and present operations. They result 
from relationships and interactions that were, or are, needed for the 
ﬁ rm to do what it was set up to do. Every company in every network 
occupies a particular position in relationship to other network members. 
Network position can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 A company’s network position is the sum total of a company’s 
network relationships and all the activity links, resource ties and 
actor bonds that these relationships contain. 
   These relationships both constrain and enable what that ﬁ  rm can do 
in the future. A company that has all the relationships in place to be a 
successful shipbuilder cannot become a ﬁ  nancial institution without 
creating new relationships that provide the necessary skills and 
resources. Relationships can have more advantageous consequences. A 
supplier might introduce a ﬁ  rm to one of its customers, enabling them 

===== PAGE 320 =====
 
Managing networks for customer relationship management performance 297
to work on a project of shared interest. Alternatively, a supplier might 
choose to withdraw from a relationship with a customer in order not to 
endanger a relationship with a bigger, more proﬁ table customer. 
  A company’s network position is a resource that can create competitive 
advantage. Networks supply the resources and perform the activities 
that enable companies to create and deliver value to their customers. 
Network positions are dynamic. Members adapt their network positions 
to ensure their survival and prosperity. They look for opportunities to 
exploit. For example, they seek out relationships that can be used to lift 
sales or reduce costs. Avon Rubber, for example, manufactures engine 
mounts for the car industry and counts Ford as one of its strategically 
signiﬁ cant customers. It leveraged its relationship with this reference 
customer to win business from Saab, and to enable it to present its 
credentials to other car manufacturers. 
   Clearly, some network positions are more inﬂ  uential than others. 
For example, a network member might be positioned as a gatekeeper 
to opportunities that are highly sought after by other network 
members. The supplier of a subassembly, such as a braking system for 
a car, has considerable network power in enabling or disabling access of 
component suppliers to the car manufacturer. 
  Whether a desired network position is achieved is determined at 
least in part by the ﬁ  rm’s network competence. This is the ﬁ  rm’s ability 
to accrue and/or utilize the necessary knowledge, skills, qualiﬁ  cations 
and experience to successfully manage network interactions.  
2   Skilful 
management of the company’s network position can realize several 
beneﬁ ts. Toyota uses its network position to enhance their cars ’  reliability, 
economy and design. Toyota works with and through its network 
members to keep costs low, while ensuring product quality is high. Every 
company’s network position is subject to a set of relational obligations and 
restraints among network members. For example, in the Toyota scenario 
(see Figure 10.3 ) the company expects tier one suppliers to develop and 
strengthen their relationships with tier two suppliers to ensure that Toyota 
gets the quality they require. Tier two suppliers expect tier one suppliers 
to maintain a good relationship with Toyota to ensure that they have 
ongoing access to a strategically signiﬁ cant customer. 
   It is unlikely that all the potential for competitive advantage that 
is contained in a network is presently exploited. Focal companies may 
not be fully aware of the opportunities that exist for cooperation and 
rationalization between network members. For example, there may 
be opportunities to bring together the innovative competencies of 
one network member, the manufacturing expertise of another and 
the marketing know-how of a third company, to create and launch 
successful new products. Or there may be opportunities to develop joint 
purchasing arrangements. Perhaps it might be possible to eliminate 
some processes that are duplicated. For example, a supplier may have a 
quality assurance programme in place; the supplier’s customer may not 
need a quality control programme based on inspection of that supplier’s 
products.  

===== PAGE 321 =====
 
298 Customer Relationship Management
    What is meant by 
 ‘ focal ﬁ rm? ’  
   We’ve already used the expression  ‘ focal ﬁ rm ’  in this chapter. The focal 
ﬁ rm is the ﬁ rm whose network is being considered. If you are examining 
Delta Plastics ’  network, Delta Plastics is the focal ﬁ  rm. Sometimes the 
threads linking a focal ﬁ rm to its network are loosely connected; at other 
times they are contractually deﬁ  ned and tightly controlled, as in the 
relationship between Dell Computers and its component suppliers. 
   There is growing recognition that the resources within networks need 
to be actively coordinated and managed. A focal organization must take 
responsibility for managing its network so that it creates and delivers 
sustainable value to customers. Failure by a network member to provide 
the necessary resources or perform the required activities could threaten 
the performance of the focal organization. Although ﬁ rms do try to exert 
inﬂ uence within their immediate network neighbours, actions elsewhere 
in the network – though several steps removed from the focal ﬁ  rm – 
might make a considerable difference to that ﬁ  rm’s performance. For 
example, the collapse of an agricultural chemical ﬁ  rm in Brazil might 
lead to a dramatic rise in the cost of coffee beans, which in turn drives up 
the retail price of coffee in overseas markets, in turn fuelling consumer 
demand for an alternative hot beverage, tea.  
    Business networks 
and CRM 
   Networks are important from a strategic CRM perspective, because 
network members supply the material inputs, services, funding, 
people, technology and knowledge that are used to create value 
propositions for the focal ﬁ  rm’s customers. They also provide services 
such as advertising, logistics and distribution that help raise and satisfy 
customer demand. 
  Consider, for example, that some retailers have developed relationships 
with banks to offer ﬁ nancial services products to the retailer’s customers. 
You can ﬁ nd this arrangement in the UK, where Tesco and Royal Bank 
of Scotland are partners, and in Australia where Woolworths and 
Commonwealth Bank partner. This is an arrangement that blurs the 
conventional customer-perceived distinctions between retailer and 
bank. For partnerships like these to succeed, each partner needs to 
understand the other party’s competences, to share customer-related 
information, to align their technologies and to be clear about the goals of 
the partnership. If the relationship between the retailer and the bank is 
poorly managed, value will not be delivered to customers or created for 
the partners. Liberating the potential value in customer relationships also 
hinges on companies effectively managing their non-customer network 

===== PAGE 322 =====
 
Managing networks for customer relationship management performance 299
relationships, that is, relationships with alliance partners, suppliers, 
distributors, ﬁ nanciers and so on. 
   The need to manage business networks is recognized in modern CRM 
systems, with the move towards extra-enterprise, or collaborative, CRM. 
CRM systems now include applications for managing relationships 
with partners (PRM), the integration of websites for investor relations, 
the management of relationships with employees (ERM) and, through 
integration with enterprise resource planning (ERP), the management of 
suppliers.
    The SCOPE of CRM 
  There are four main constituencies of a focal organization’s network. As 
illustrated in Figure 10.2   , they are suppliers, owners/investors, partners 
and employees. This ﬁ gure shows the focal ﬁ rm’s customers at the heart 
of the network and the four constituencies rotating around them. You can 
use the mnemonic SCOPE to remember the constituencies in the network: 
S      /H11005      suppliers, C      /H11005      the focal ﬁ rm’s customers who are at the hub of the 
network, O      /H11005      owners/investors, P      /H11005      partners and E      /H11005      employees. The 
direction of the arrowhead in the outer wheel is meant to indicate that 
they are all aligned to the common goal of helping the focal ﬁ  rm create 
and deliver value for, and from, their chosen customers. Three of these 
constituencies are external to the company: suppliers, owners/investors 
and partners. One is internal: employees. We can even think of this 
internal constituency as being a network in its own right. Individuals 
within ﬁ rms have formal relationships with colleagues, for example in 
a reporting hierarchy or cross-functional teams. They also have informal 
relationships that are not task oriented. We examine relationships with 
suppliers, partners and employees in subsequent chapters. 
Partners
CustomersSuppliers Employees
Owners/investors
 Figure 10.2 
      The SCOPE of CRM    

===== PAGE 323 =====
 
300 Customer Relationship Management
  Most companies operate within and through two major network 
constituencies: supplier networks and distribution networks. We introduce 
these in the following sections. 
    Supplier networks 
  As you read earlier, Toyota only manufactures about 20 per cent of the 
value of its cars. It relies on a network of approximately 50 000 supplier 
relationships to create and supply the inputs required for car manufacture. 
This is not to say that Toyota tries to manage 50 000 relationships. The 
company has a number of critical relationships with tier one suppliers 
(see  Figure 10.3   ); these in turn have a number of important relationships 
that enable them to create and deliver what Toyota wants. They have 
relationships with third tier companies that enable them to meet their 
customers ’  requirements, and on. 
3
Toyota
First
tier
supplier
First
tier
supplier
First
tier
supplier
Second
tier
supplier
First
tier
supplier
Lateral co-ordination
Fourth tier
supplier
Third tier
supplier
Fifth tier
supplier
Second
tier
supplierSecond
tier
supplier
Second
tier
supplier
 Figure 10.3 
      Toyota’s supplier 
network    
   Toyota regards these tier one suppliers as  ‘ systems suppliers ’ . This 
means that they not only supply the parts that they manufacture, but 
they are also responsible for managing the contributions of a network 
of lower tier suppliers. This is much the same idea as the ‘ category 
captain ’ . Some large supermarket operators have appointed category 
captains to work cooperatively with them to create proﬁ  table product 
categories. A category is a class of product, such as men’s shaving 
supplies, hosiery or ice-cream. The category captain is responsible to the 

===== PAGE 324 =====
 
Managing networks for customer relationship management performance 301
retailer for assembling a network of complementary lower tier suppliers 
that contribute to the category performance. 
   This illustrates a number of features of networks. Unlike single 
supplier–customer relationships, networks consist of a large number of 
indirect relationships. They also demand careful coordination. Toyota 
needs to work closely with tier one suppliers, so that they know exactly 
what Toyota wants and when. Many of these tier one suppliers will have 
their own CRM systems to manage their relationships with Toyota. Tier 
one, in turn, needs to coordinate with tier two suppliers. There might 
also need to be lateral coordination between suppliers at any tier. For 
example, this might be needed when Toyota’s tier one suspension 
subassembly manufacturer needs to coordinate with Toyota’s tier one 
braking system subassembly manufacturer. 
   Large companies within networks can exert considerable inﬂ  uence on 
the overall structure and performance of the network. Toyota might, for 
example, insist on speciﬁ c product quality standards, not only from tier 
one suppliers, but also from tier two, three or four suppliers. It might 
also require a tier three supplier to stop purchasing from a tier four 
supplier, if that supplier also supplies a competitor. Toyota does, in fact, 
try to inﬂ uence suppliers up to three tiers away. 
  Networks may be global. With increased concentration of manufacturing 
and globalization of brands, companies are faced with the challenge of 
sourcing inputs that are of a universal standard, whether the end customer 
is in America or Azerbaijan, Sydney or Shanghai. Kodak has addressed 
this problem by classifying its suppliers into three groups, world source 
suppliers, preferred suppliers and niche suppliers, as shown in  Figure 
10.4   . This enables Kodak managers to purchase with conﬁ dence. 
World-source supplier
/H11002 Required sources of specified products. Global suppliers. Prices negotiated centrally.
 Formal variance approval required for purchasing from other sources.
Preferred supplier
/H11002 Kodak identifies a few specific sources for a specific input. Purchasing from these
 sources is encouraged though not mandated. May have global or regional
 pricing agreements.
Niche supplier
/H11002 Specific suppliers of input for specific applications.
 Figure 10.4 
      Kodak’s supplier 
classiﬁ cation    
    Distribution networks 
  All companies have distribution networks. Some commentators prefer 
to use the term ‘ demand chain ’  to describe the linear arrangement of 

===== PAGE 325 =====
 
302 Customer Relationship Management
customers of the focal ﬁ rm, their customers, and the customers of these 
customers, until the end user is reached. However, closer examination 
shows these to be network arrangements, not linear chains. Figure 10.5    
shows how IBMs demand network moves computers so they reach end 
users in Italy.  4
Other
suppliers IBM
Value added
distributors (VAD)
Joint venture
partners
Software
houses
Independent
distributors
Dedicated
partners
End userEnd userEnd userEnd user
InstallersValue added
reseller (VAR)
Home shopping 
companies
Full service
retailers
 Figure 10.5 
      IBM’s distribution 
network in Italy    
   This network illustrates a number of other features of business 
networks. Networks comprise a variety of organizations that contribute 
in different ways to the performance of a focal organization. Companies 
bring different competencies, resources, relationships, management 
styles and histories to the network. Quite possibly, each company will 
have been established and developed for different purposes, and may 
be working towards objectives that are in conﬂ  ict with those of the 
focal ﬁ rm. There is often potential for conﬂ  ict in the relationships of 
customers and the focal ﬁ  rm. In this illustration, IBM supplies home 
shopping companies directly, thus denying its other ﬁ  rst tier customers 
the opportunity to develop their own relationships with these catalogue 
companies. Managing network relationships can be very demanding. 
Customers will probably require different forms of contact with the focal 
company. Some might want the support of a key account management 
team; others might want to self-manage their purchasing through a 
portal. The focal company may or may not be willing to accommodate 
these requirements, depending upon the proﬁ t potential of the customer, 
or other considerations.  

===== PAGE 326 =====
 
Managing networks for customer relationship management performance 303
    Principles of network 
management
  In this section we set out a number of principles of network management. 5
   Networks are not controlled by single companies. There is no senior 
management team directing the operation of any network. All networks 
are complex, adaptive, self-regulating systems. Networks evolve as 
companies interact with each other over time, each member jostling for 
position, acting and reacting as they see ﬁ t. 
   However, there are circumstances where single companies do have 
signiﬁ cant inﬂ  uence, though not absolute control, over business 
networks. It is also true that all companies, whether they are bit players 
or star performers, want to exert inﬂ  uence over important network 
relationships in order to enhance and protect their competitive positions. 
  The degree of interdependence between network members plays a 
big role in determining the extent to which any party can inﬂ  uence, or 
be inﬂ uenced by, others. If company A is highly dependent on company 
B, company B has the power to manage the relationship as it sees ﬁ  t. If 
company A is also dependent on B, in other words the parties are mutually 
dependent, the power balance is likely to tend towards equilibrium and 
the relationship is likely to be managed as a partnership. If neither party is 
dependent on the other, then there may be no relationship to manage. It is 
clear that network management can be as much about being manageable, 
as about managing. 
6
   Thomas Ritter and his colleagues have developed the idea of  ‘ network 
competence ’  to describe the proﬁ  ciency of companies in the twin 
tasks of managing both networks and individual relationships within 
networks. A company that is high in network competence not only has 
the necessary knowledge, skills, and qualiﬁ  cations, but also uses them 
effectively to manage relationships at both the network level and the 
individual level. 
7   This suggests an important distinction that can be 
made between management of networks and management in networks.  
    Management of networks 
  Single companies, particularly in highly concentrated industries, can exert 
signiﬁ cant inﬂ uence over business networks. You have already read about 
the Toyota case, for example. There are other contexts where this inﬂ uence 
is found. Grocery supply-networks are dominated by retail multiples such 
as Wal-Mart and Tesco. Franchise operations are run by franchisors that 
typically specify and control every detail of their franchisees ’  operations. 
In these situations senior managers of the focal ﬁ  rm might think of 
themselves as being the network hub or channel captain. Their strategic 
orientation is towards the performance of the entire network. 
   New business start-ups are typically faced with the challenge 
of designing their networks from scratch. They have no relationships 

===== PAGE 327 =====
 
304 Customer Relationship Management
in situ  , so they have to create the relationships that will enable them 
to create and deliver the desired value proposition and customer 
experience, in effect facing the same challenges as those charged with 
responsibility for strategic CRM. These challenges fall into three major 
categories: identify network requirements, acquire network expertise 
and manage network performance. 
    1 .       Identify network requirements  : companies need to identify the 
business activities that must be performed by network members to 
create and deliver value for and from their chosen customers. These 
activities may be performed by suppliers, distributors, franchisees, 
contractors or business partners, for example. Some of these will be 
critical to value creation and delivery, others will not.  
   2 .       Acquire network expertise  : companies will need to evaluate their 
current network position to identify current network members and 
assess whether they have the resources and commitment to perform 
the activities required. If the present network is inadequate, companies 
will need to extend their network to ﬁ  nd the resources to perform 
the activities that are required. Effectively, they will be leveraging 
existing or developing new actor bonds at the organizational or 
interpersonal level to improve network performance. The resource 
constellation of the network is the sum of resources that are invested 
in interﬁ rm relationships across the network as a whole. In a complex 
network, there is almost certain to be both underemployed resources 
and resource shortages. Are there ways in which the resources of 
the network could be better deployed? For example, does the focal 
company need to run its own ﬂ  eet of vehicles when a network 
member has spare capacity in logistics? Must the focal company set up 
a retail sales-force if another network member can perform the same 
function on a commission basis? 
     New network members are critical for winning a higher share of 
customer wallet. Tesco, for example, has created partnerships with 
a number of organizations, including a travel agency, insurance 
company and car manufacturer, as shown in Case 10.2. It has 
developed a number of other joint ventures where it does not have 
the competencies itself to exploit opportunities.
       Case 10.2   
  Network partners at Tesco      
   Tesco has actively sought to create partnering programmes with other organizations. 
Partners have included: 
●      Lunn Poly, one of the UKs multiple travel agencies, to offer a discounted travel service  
●      B & Q, a major home improvement chain to offer discounted  ‘ do-it-yourself ’  and homeware 
products 
●      Royal Bank of Scotland to offer banking and other ﬁ nancial services 

===== PAGE 328 =====
 
Managing networks for customer relationship management performance 305
    3 .       Manage network performance : companies will need to brief network 
members so that they understand the focal company’s customers 
and their role in creating value for them. This may mean writing 
speciﬁ cations, implementing common CRM applications, setting 
and monitoring quality standards or designating people to take an 
oversight or coaching role. Companies will need to monitor how well 
the existing network is performing and look for ways to improve 
performance. Improvements can take two forms: more effective 
contributions or more efﬁ  cient contributions from the network. 
Network members can contribute to CRM performance in a number 
of ways, including the following: 
       
●        Offering new customer insight  : they may be able to improve the 
focal company’s understanding of its customers. In Australia when 
Commonwealth Bank and Woolworth’s, the food retailer, created a 
joint venture to launch Ezi-Bank, the bank learned a lot more about 
their customers from access to Woolworth’s transactional data.  
       ●        Creating value-adds   for the focal company or its customers as 
a result of better cost performance at meeting speciﬁ  cations, 
improved product quality or identifying new opportunities. 
   There is a clear danger in overspecifying network relationships. 
Marks &  Spencer, for example, had very tight control over its supplier 
relationships. It established speciﬁ  cations and controlled design and 
quality rigorously. One effect was to stiﬂ  e innovation. Suppliers did 
what they were told and failed to contribute to their full potential. 
  A number of different managerial roles have been identiﬁ  ed in the 
management of business networks.  
8
●      The  network architect  designs a network for a given purpose. This 
might, for example, be the leader of a joint venture across international 
borders, involving several companies. Typically, network architects 
are senior management with strategic responsibility. For example, 
when companies decide that they want to implement a CRM system, a 
senior manager often acts as network architect, specifying the various 
network tasks that need performing as the CRM project takes shape. 
The architect (we called this person the CRM programme director 
in Chapter 3) may identify a number of roles for network partners: 
systems integrators, CRM software vendors, data analytics companies 
and so on, as outlined in  Figure 10.6   .  
●      The  lead operator  introduces particular businesses or individuals into 
the network.  
●      Direct Line to offer household insurance products  
●      General Motors to enable customers to buy cars at discounted prices.  
           The objective of all these programmes has been to win a greater share of customer spend. 

===== PAGE 329 =====
 
306 Customer Relationship Management
●      The  caretaker  takes an overview of the performance of the network, 
perhaps suggesting ways in which the network resources could be 
better deployed. 
    Management in networks 
   Not all network relationships are alike. The challenge of managing 
network relationships is all the more apparent when you consider 
how much variety exists. Network relationships vary in terms of their 
importance, intensity, closeness, strength, adaptation, commitment and 
power distribution.  
9
  Not all relationships are equally important. Some assume more 
importance because of their implications for value creation or value 
destruction. A relationship that is difﬁ cult and costly to manage may be 
important because it is a value destroyer. On the other hand a relationship 
with a strategically signiﬁ  cant customer assumes importance because 
of the value it produces. Relationship intensity is expressed in the 
number, frequency and level of contacts between the companies. In a 
close relationship there would be sharing of information, joint problem 
solving and commitment of resources by both partners, and trust would 
evolve over time. Closeness does not necessarily imply a lack of conﬂ  ict. 
Conﬂ ict and cooperation can coexist in strong relationships; they are not 
necessarily mutually exclusive. Stronger relationships are more able to 
withstand challenges to the social and structural bonds that tie them. The 
power distribution between network members, as you read above, can 
also have a signiﬁ cant impact on how network relationships are managed. 
Infrastructure
vendors
CRM
software
vendors
Client
Consultants
Systems
integrators
Process
engineers
Data
analytics
vendors
 Figure 10.6 
      Technology 
partners for CRM 
implementations    

===== PAGE 330 =====
 
Managing networks for customer relationship management performance 307
   Management in networks is both about managing individual 
relationships and managing clusters of relationships. For example, 
consumer goods manufacturers commonly cluster their customers into 
two groups: retail multiples and independents. Each is managed in 
very different ways. Retail multiples are treated as important individual 
customers and may have dedicated account managers, category 
specialists, merchandising teams and logistics specialists assigned to 
them, whereas independents are treated as a homogenous cluster and 
serviced through independent wholesalers.  
    Research into network 
competence
   Thomas Ritter and his colleagues have begun to research the inﬂ uence of 
network competence on the performance of focal organizations.  10   Using 
data collected from 308 German mechanical and electrical engineering 
companies, they found that network competence has a strong positive 
inﬂ uence on the focal ﬁ  rm’s product and process innovation success. 
Another study examined the performance of 149 university spin-offs, 
formed to commercialize technologies originating from publicly funded 
research institutions. They found that several performance variables, 
including sales growth, sales per employee, proﬁ  t, perceived customer 
relationship quality and long-term survival, are inﬂ  uenced by the spin-
off’s network competence. Research is in an early stage of development, 
but it promises to deliver results of use to managers.
        Summary      
   In this chapter you have learned about the importance of business networks to CRM 
performance. Networks are an inescapable feature of the business landscape. They 
are complex, interactive systems that are always undergoing change. Every company 
occupies a network position which is really no more than the sum total of its network 
relationships and all the activity links, resource ties and actor bonds that these 
relationships contain. Network constituents can be remembered through the mnemonic 
SCOPE: suppliers, customers, owners, partners and employees. Two of these are 
particularly important to CRM. Network members supply the material inputs, services, 
funding, people, technology and knowledge that are used to create value propositions 
for the focal ﬁ  rm’s customers, and network members play demand chain roles in 
communicating and distributing products and services to customers. No networks are 
subject to the absolute control of any single company, though all organizations strive 
to enhance their network position by exerting inﬂ  uence over other network members. 
Senior managers need to master two network management competences: managing of 

===== PAGE 331 =====
 
308 Customer Relationship Management
  References  
       1.          Håkansson ,    H.   and   Henders ,    B.             ( 1992 )       International co-operative 
relationships in technological development .        In:       M.     Forsgren  , 
  J.     Johanson,       et al.   (eds.)          Managing networks in international business           .  
 Philadelphia :       Gordon and Breach      , pp.  32  –       46        .  
       2.          Ritter ,    T.   and   Germunden ,    H.G.                ( 2003 )        Network competence: its 
impact on innovation success and its antecedents .             Journal of Business 
Research       , Vol.  56         , pp.  745  –       755        .  
       3.          Blenkhorn ,    D.   and   Noori ,    A.H.                ( 1999 )        What it takes to supply Japanese 
OEMs .            Industrial Marketing Management       , Vol.  19      ( 1 )       , pp.  21  –       31        . 
       4.          Ford ,    D.             ( 2001 )        Understanding business markets and purchasing             .  
 London :       Thompson Learning              .  
       5.         This section is largely derived from the work of the IMP (Industrial 
Marketing and Purchasing) group of researchers. Some relevant IMP 
publications, which were used to put together this part of the chapter 
are: Ford, D., Berthon, P ., Gadde, L-E., Håkansson, H., Naudé, P ., 
Ritter, T. and Snehota, I. (2002)  The business marketing course: managing 
in complex networks  . Chichester: John Wiley; Ford, D., Gadde, L-E., 
Håkansson, H., Lundgren, A., Snehota, I., Turnbull, P . and Wilson, D. 
(1998) Managing business relationships  . Chichester: John Wiley; 
Gemünden, H-G., Ritter, T. and Walter, A. (1997)  Relationships and 
networks in international markets  . Oxford: Pergamon; Håkansson, H. 
and Snehota, I. (1995) Developing relationships in business networks  . 
London: International Thompson Press; Naudé, P . and Turnbull, P . 
(1998) Network dynamics in international marketing . Oxford: Pergamon. 
See also the IMP Group’s website  www.impgroup.org .       
       6.          Ritter ,    T.  ,   Wilkinson ,    I.F.   and   Johnston ,    W.J.                ( 2004 )        Managing in 
complex business networks .             Industrial Marketing Management        , Vol. 
 33         , pp.  175  –       183        .  
       7.          Ritter ,   T.   and   Gemünden ,    H.G.                ( 2003 )        Network competence: its 
impact on innovation success and its antecedents .             Journal of Business 
Research       , Vol.  56         , pp.  745  –       755        .  
       8.          Snow ,    C.C.  ,   Miles ,    R.E.   and   Coleman ,    H.J.     Jr.                ( 1992 )        Managing 21st 
century network organizations .            Organizational Dynamics        ,  Winter         , 
p p . 5   –        1 9         .   
networks, and managing in networks. Management of networks involves identifying 
the activities that need to be performed in order for companies to create and deliver 
value for and from customers, and to recognize, then coordinate and manage, the 
actors and resources that are best suited to perform those activities. Sometimes these 
will be internal to an organization; often they will be external. Management in 
networks involves managing both clusters of network members, such as segments of 
customers, and managing individual network members, such as advertising agencies or 
logistics partners.        

===== PAGE 332 =====
 
Managing networks for customer relationship management performance 309
       9.          Cheung ,    M.Y.S.   and   Turnbull ,    P .W.             ( 1998 )       A review of the nature 
and development of inter-organisational relationships: a network 
perspective .        In:       P .     Naudé   and   P .W.     Turnbull  (eds)       .      Network dynamics 
in international marketing          .  Oxford :       Pergamon      , pp.  42  –       69        .  
      10.         Ritter, T. and Gemünden, H-G. (2003) Network competence: its 
impact on innovation success and its antecedents. Journal of Business 
Research , Vol. 56(9), September, pp. 745–755; Ritter, T. and Gemünden, 
H-G. (2004) The impact of a company’s business strategy on its 
technological competence, network competence and innovation 
success. Journal of Business Research  , Vol. 57(5), May, pp. 548–558; 
Achim, W., Auer, M. and Ritter. T. (2006) The impact of network 
capabilities and entrepreneurial orientation on university spin-
off performance.  Journal of Business Venturing  , Vol. 21(4), July, pp. 
541–567; Ritter, T. and Gemünden, H-G. (2003) Inter-organizational 
relationships and networks: an overview.  Journal of Business Research , 
Vol. 56(9), September, pp. 691–697. 

===== PAGE 333 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 334 =====
 
                 Managing supplier and 
partner relationships  
 Chapter 11 

===== PAGE 335 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 336 =====
 
           Chapter objectives      
   By the end of this chapter, you will understand: 
    1.   the role that suppliers and partners play in the achievement of CRM outcomes  
    2.   the many types of supplier and partner  
    3.   trends in supplier relationship management.         
    Introduction 
   This chapter examines the important role that suppliers and partners 
play in the achievement of CRM outcomes. As was made clear in the 
last chapter, every company is located in a network of other companies, 
organizations, groups and individuals, the performance of which 
signiﬁ cantly determines that company’s success or failure. Among two 
of the more important network constituencies are suppliers and partners, 
who sit at different positions in the value chain. 
   The value chain ( Figure 11.1   ) is a framework developed by Michael 
Porter that identiﬁ  es ways companies create value. 
1   The nine value-
creating activities are clustered into primary and secondary activities. 
The primary activities listed along the bottom of the value chain are 
inbound logistics, operations, outbound logistics, marketing and sales, 
and service. The support activities are listed vertically at the top of the 
value chain and are procurement, technology development, human 
resource management and ﬁ  rm infrastructure. Value can be created 
by companies by managing each component of the value chain more 
efﬁ ciently and effectively, and by improving coordination of these 
activities across the business. In this chapter we are concerned with the 
Inbound
logistics
Outbound
logisticsOperations Marketing
and sales Service
Margin
Margin
Firm infrastructure
Human resource management
Technology development
Procurement
 Figure 11.1 
      Michael Porter’s 
value chain model  

===== PAGE 337 =====
 
314 Customer Relationship Management
relationships that companies establish with suppliers as they procure 
input goods and services (a secondary activity, according to Porter) and 
with partners in other parts of the value chain, for example, operations, 
outbound logistics, marketing, selling and service. 
   In the sections that follow we will ﬁ  rst look at relationships with 
suppliers, and then partners.  
    Supplier relationships 
   Suppliers are the  ‘ S ’  in the SCOPE model that was introduced in Chapter 10. 
Many people think that supplier relationship management is quite 
distinct from CRM. In IT terms this may be so. Supplier relationship 
management is a back-ofﬁ  ce function managed through enterprise 
resource planning (ERP), supply chain management (SCM) or specialist 
supplier relationship management (SRM) applications. CRM is a front-
ofﬁ ce function managed through a different set of software applications, 
though these can be seamlessly integrated with ERP , SCM and SRM. For 
example, SAP Business Suite offers a comprehensive family of industry-
speciﬁ c software applications including ERP , SRM, SCM and CRM that 
allow for complete integration. 
   We discuss supplier relationships here because we believe that 
suppliers can and should be aligned and synchronized to contribute 
signiﬁ cantly to the achievement of value for both the focal company 
and its customers. At the very least, suppliers need to be briefed and 
managed so that they provide the right inputs, at the right time and at 
the right price to enable the focal company to serve its customers well.
       Case 11.1   
  Synchronizing customer and supplier management at SEAT      
   Supply chain management is synchronized with customer purchasing at Spanish auto 
manufacturer, SEAT. 
  EXEL is a global leader in providing supply chain solutions to the automotive industry. EXEL 
works closely with SEAT providing an all in one solution for the car manufacturer and its 
suppliers. Essentially EXEL manages the logistics for the just-in-time assembly line, linking 
the manufacturer with a network of more than 120 component suppliers. To achieve this EXEL 
manages the supply of 95 500 components every day and nearly 6500 components every hour, 
from the suppliers to the assembly line where 2335 cars per day are manufactured. It takes 
only 105 minutes between a part being ordered by SEAT and that part being assembled in the 
car. To build 2335 cars per day, EXEL receives an order for a new car every 35 seconds. 
   Relationships with suppliers are critical to the delivery of value to 
both the focal company and its customers. In 2006 General Motors spent 
US$164 billion and General Electric spent US$74 billion on purchasing 

===== PAGE 338 =====
 
Managing supplier and partner relationships 315
input goods and services. For many companies, purchasing costs are 
50 per cent or more of the total costs of running the business. There are 
variations between industries: in electricity and gas utilities, input goods 
and services represent 10 to 15 per cent of sales. In electronics it is 30 to 
60 per cent; in chemicals it is 40 to 85 per cent. In 2006, Toyota spent a 
total of ¥16 335 billion on input goods and services. A 1 per cent saving 
in procurement costs would lead to a direct improvement in Toyota’s 
bottom line over ¥163 billion, undoubtedly thrilling shareholders! 
  The relationship between suppliers and their customers has often been 
portrayed as a conﬂ icted, adversarial power struggle in which each player 
manoeuvres to secure a bigger share of proﬁ  t. While there is still clear 
evidence of short-term, opportunistic behaviours on both the supplier 
and customer side, in recent years there has been a trend towards a more 
relational approach to supplier management. This is characterized as a shift 
from a win–lose approach to supplier management to a win–win approach. 
   Improvements in supply network management offer much more than 
the simple prospect of reductions in direct input costs. 
2   Many companies 
now cooperate closely with their suppliers in a number of activities, such 
as product development, supplier accreditation and process alignment.  
    Product development 
  Suppliers may have ideas for product improvements or new products. 
A leading machine tool manufacturer, Mazak Corporation, is often in a 
position to advise customers of ways to make manufacturing operations 
more cost-effective. One study of the South African textile industry has 
found that collaboration between clothing manufacturers and clothing 
retailers accelerates the product development process, and enables 
fashion items to be brought to market more quickly than those of 
competitors.
3   Sometimes product development costs and risks are shared 
between customer and supplier. 
    Supplier accreditation 
programmes
   Some companies have introduced supplier accreditation programmes, 
under which certiﬁ ed or preferred supplier status is granted to suppliers 
that meet certain quality standards. If you are not accredited you are 
not shortlisted to supply, and without accreditation you cannot begin 
to establish a relationship. There are three main supplier accreditation 
options: requiring suppliers to be certiﬁ  ed as ISO 9000 compliant; 
requiring suppliers to monitor and improve their operations against an 
external business excellence standard or developing and implementing 
your own accreditation programme. 
   One common approach to supplier accreditation is to require suppliers 
to be accredited against the international standard, ISO 9000. The ISO 

===== PAGE 339 =====
 
316 Customer Relationship Management
9000 series is an international quality standard in which quality is 
deﬁ ned as: 
  ‘ the totality of features and characteristics of a product or service 
that bear on its ability to satisfy stated or implied needs ’ .
   The ISO 9000 series is a family of related standards that have been 
developed to help organizations design, implement and operate effective 
quality management systems. 
●      ISO 9000 describes the fundamentals of quality management systems 
and sets out the terminology that is used in quality management 
systems.
●      ISO 9001 speciﬁ es the requirements of a quality management system 
when organizations need to demonstrate their ability to provide 
products and services that meet customer or regulatory requirements.  
●      ISO 9004 provides guidelines for both the effectiveness and efﬁ  ciency 
of quality management systems.  
●      ISO 19011 provides guidance on auditing quality management systems.    
   When a company is certiﬁ ed to ISO 9000 standards, this means that 
the company has documented its quality system to the satisfaction of 
an approved third party. ISO 9000 is administered by the International 
Organization for Standardization, based in Geneva, and is subject to 
periodic change. 
  Other companies insist that their suppliers apply for the Malcolm 
Baldrige National Quality Award, the European Quality Award or 
some other acknowledged business excellence model. The European 
Quality Award (see  Figure 11.2   ), which is administered by the European 
Foundation for Quality Management, assesses company performance 
against a non-prescriptive framework. The model’s framework contains 
nine criteria. Five of these are  ‘ enablers ’  (leadership, policy and strategy, 
people, partnerships and resources) and four are  ‘ results ’  (customer 
ResultsEnablers
Innovation and learning
Leadership
People
Policy
and strategy
Partnerships
and resources
Processes
People
results
Customer
results
Society
results
Key
performance
results
 Figure 11.2 
      EFQM excellence 
model
4    

===== PAGE 340 =====
 
Managing supplier and partner relationships 317
results, people results, society results and key performance results). The 
 ‘ enabler ’  criteria describe what an organization does. The  ‘ results ’  criteria 
describe what an organization achieves.  ‘ Results ’  are explicitly linked to 
 ‘ enablers ’ .5
  Other companies operate their own supplier accreditation programmes: 
Ford, Motorola and Body Shop for example. Motorola have said: 
  ‘ If you’re a Motorola supplier, an ISO 9000 certiﬁ  cation won’t even 
buy you a cup of coffee. We would never stop auditing a company 
with ISO 9000. It’s just a fraction of what we are looking for ’ .6
   The Body Shop rates its suppliers for their adherence to Body Shop’s 
published ethical standards.  
    Process alignment 
   Once customers and suppliers make a commitment to each other, they 
may begin to look for opportunities to align their processes. Process 
alignment has the objective of reducing the costs of maintaining the 
relationship. Two processes are widely aligned: quality processes and 
the order fulﬁ lment processes. 
    Aligning quality processes 
   Failure to comply with quality standards can be a huge cost for some 
companies. It has been suggested that the poor quality of incoming 
goods accounts for up to 70 per cent of total non-quality costs. 
7
Despite W. Edwards Deming’s injunction that companies should  ‘ cease 
dependence on inspection to achieve quality ’ ,8   many companies still 
use inspection for that purpose. An alternative is for the supplier and 
customer to determine jointly how to improve quality performance, 
thereby reducing, for both companies, the cost of nonconformance, and 
improving their competitive position. Process alignment on both sides of 
the relationship might look like this: 
●      the customer establishes best in class quality standards  
●      the supplier benchmarks quality conformance against best-in-class 
and identiﬁ es opportunities for improvement  
●      supplier and customer agree strategy for quality improvement, 
involving kaizen (continuous improvement by all people involved in 
the process), information sharing and ongoing benchmarking  
●      supplier introduces a quality assurance programme (quality 
inspection programme abandoned by customer!). 
    Figure 11.3    shows how NCR changed its purchasing processes as it 
became more relationally oriented. 9   Important changes were that the 
company ceased the practice of inviting suppliers to tender annually and 
developed a number of key supplier relationships. The quality of bought 
in parts improved materially.  

===== PAGE 341 =====
 
318 Customer Relationship Management
    Aligning the order fulﬁ lment process 
  A second process that is often redesigned as companies become closer 
is the order-to-cash cycle, or the order fulﬁ  lment process. This process 
involves the customer establishing an acceptable inventory level 
and issuing an order for inventory replenishment when that limit is 
approached. The supplier ﬁ lls the order and invoices the customer. The 
customer pays the invoice. Costs are removed and accuracy improved 
by the application of two different technology-based solutions: electronic 
data interchange and portals. 
   Electronic data interchange (EDI) enables suppliers and customers 
to trade electronically. EDI involves the interchange of unambiguously 
structured inventory, order and invoice data between computers 
according to agreed message standards. It eliminates the labour-intensive 
paper trail that is characteristic of many order processing systems. Large 
manufacturers, such as automobile companies, require their suppliers to 
implement EDI. 
   EDI delivers a number of strategic and operational beneﬁ  ts to 
companies. Strategic beneﬁ ts from EDI include the following: 
●      EDI acts as a structural bond that not only symbolizes the commitment 
of the participants, but also acts as barrier to exiting the relationship 
●      EDI provides convenient access to accurate customer purchasing and 
payment histories and to detailed customer management costs that 
can be useful when conducting customer portfolio analysis  
●      EDI ensures improved customer service (more accurate and timely 
fulﬁ lment)  
●      EDI records allow suppliers to produce more accurate demand forecasts  
●      EDI creates the possibility to developing new business processes such 
as just-in-time operations. 
   Operational beneﬁ ts from EDI include cost savings, improved accuracy, 
better fulﬁ lment performance, and improved cash ﬂ  ow and working 
capital positions. 
●      EDI eliminates the need to re-enter data from paper documents, thus 
preventing clerical errors. It has been suggested that 70 per cent of all 
Contract renegotiated annually
Incoming inspection
Purchasing components
Over 2000 suppliers
Unreliable parts quality
Evergreen contracts
Benchmarking
Securing technology
150 suppliers
50 to 100 non-compliance
per million incoming parts
Then Now
 Figure 11.3 
      How NCR’s 
purchasing policies 
changed    

===== PAGE 342 =====
 
Managing supplier and partner relationships 319
computer input has previously been output from another computer. 
Each re-entry of data is a potential source of error.  
●      Electronic processing of orders costs a fraction of paper-based 
systems, perhaps as little as one-tenth. This is partly because EDI 
reduces the need for people to be involved in order processing.  
●      EDI systems can reduce inventory costs. When customers submit their 
delivery requirements with order data, suppliers can plan production 
with more conﬁ  dence, thus reducing inventories. Reduction in 
inventory can result in major savings.  
●      Use of EDI to transmit invoice data and payments can improve 
cash ﬂ  ow and working capital, as invoices are routinely dealt with 
according to rules built into the system. 
  One study of EDI in the automotive industry ﬁ  nds that although 
component suppliers are compelled to implement EDI by their 
assembler customers, they derive signiﬁ cant beneﬁ ts including improved 
productivity, clerical staff savings, increased data accuracy, enhanced 
customer service and reduction in administrative costs. Suppliers who 
integrate EDI into their other systems enjoy even more dramatic results.  
10
   Portals are becoming more common as companies try to reduce 
transaction costs and improve customer service. Extranets provide the 
infrastructure that enable customers to access a supplier’s portal. A 
portal acts as a storefront. It is a company’s electronic shop window. It 
has on display a number of products and services that are customizable 
for different portal visitors. The extranet enables customers and other 
visitors to get access to parts of the ‘ store ’  behind the portal  ‘ storefront ’  
from outside the company. Visitors gain access by password or security 
certiﬁ cate. Customers can use a supplier’s portal to place orders, track 
order progress, download training manuals, obtain price lists, access 
FAQ pages, and obtain invoices, brochures and collateral materials. 
Suppliers can use portals to service the requirements of some or all of 
their customers. One of the major beneﬁ ts is that it reduces service costs 
by eliminating the use of more expensive communication channels, such 
as sales representatives, couriers, fax and telephone. Effectively, portals 
facilitate customer self-service. Whether this enhances or detracts from 
customer satisfaction is a moot point. 
  One company that has segmented its customer base, offering EDI to 
one segment and portal service to another, is Flymo, a manufacturer of 
lawnmowers available both through retail multiples and independent 
retailers. As shown in Case 11.2, Flymo services its large superstore 
customers by EDI. Smaller customers transact with Flymo though a portal.
       Case 11.2   
  Flymo’s electronic customer service      
   Flymo is a leading UK brand of lawnmower, targeted principally at the household market. 
The brand is distributed through two major channels: large do-it-yourself superstores and 

===== PAGE 343 =====
 
320 Customer Relationship Management
    Trends in supplier 
relationship management 
  A number of trends in supplier relationship management are helping 
companies improve the value they create for themselves and their 
customers. Important among these are vendor reduction programmes, 
category management, product development alliances and electronic 
procurement. 
    Vendor reduction programmes 
   The tradition has been for companies to have many suppliers competing 
to supply inputs. These would be played off against each other to obtain 
the best deal on any particular transaction. This short-term focus is now 
being replaced by a relational approach to supplier management known 
as strategic sourcing or supplier partnering. A main driver of this change 
has been recognition of the high ﬁ xed costs of supplier management. 
   Purchasing costs can be divided into ﬁ  xed and variable. Variable 
costs are those that are associated with a particular transaction. These 
include the costs of the purchased product and other item costs such as 
insurance and transportation. 
   Fixed costs are all the other costs of creating and maintaining a 
relationship with a supplier. These costs include: 
    1.     The costs of raising and processing each order. The UKs Chartered 
Institute of Purchasing and Supply estimates these average about £50, 
regardless of the value of the items purchased.  
11
    2.     The time of management and staff, as they check supplier credentials 
and credit ratings, communicate with suppliers, audit conformance 
to order speciﬁ cation and identify the best deal on a transaction-by-
transaction basis.  
    3.     Accommodation, heating, lighting, technology and so on. 
   These costs are ﬁ xed regardless of the value of the items purchased, and 
could possible be greater than the invoiced value of the purchased items. 
smaller, often independent, distributors. Flymo introduced parallel technologies to service 
these two segments. In collaboration and with the full support of the DIY superstores, it 
introduced an EDI system. Smaller distributors were serviced by Flymo through a portal. 
Co-developed with IBM, and connected to IBMs global network for security purposes, 
the portal was introduced in 1998. It cost £100 000 to develop and implement, generating 
payback in less than one year. Flymo’s smaller customers use it for online ordering, accounts 
and invoicing. It has eased communication between Flymo and dealers and raised customer 
satisfaction, although not all smaller customers responded positively to its introduction. It 
has also freed staff from routine order processing activity to deliver better customer service. 

===== PAGE 344 =====
 
Managing supplier and partner relationships 321
Purchasers customarily try to reduce variable costs by negotiating better 
prices or by outsourcing specialist services, such as logistics, to third 
parties. Often, however, there may be greater gains to be enjoyed from 
controlling ﬁ xed costs, and this generally means reducing the number of 
vendors with whom you transact. 
   Companies engaged in vendor reduction programmes are pursuing a 
number of beneﬁ ts: 
   1 .       Reduced transaction costs : the ﬁ xed costs of purchasing are reduced 
when the number of vendors is reduced. This is complemented by 
reduced search costs. If you deal with a few regular suppliers, you spend 
less time and money searching for new suppliers to add to your list. 
   2 .       Additional volume discounts  : by consolidating purchases that had 
previously been distributed among a number of suppliers, customers 
place themselves in a stronger negotiating position. Dun & Bradstreet, 
for example, consolidated their purchasing of tele-communications, IT 
and travel to yield annual savings of $10 million. 
    3 .       Performance compliance  : closer relationships with fewer suppliers, 
supported by shared information about future requirements and 
enabled by IT, produces better order fulﬁ  lment. Given closer 
relationships with fewer suppliers, customers expect their logistics 
and quality standards to be met. For example, many companies have 
adopted an OTIFNE logistics performance standard that requires 
suppliers to deliver on time (OT), in full (IF) and with no error (NE). 
If your supplier achieves on time compliance of 80 per cent, in full 
compliance of 90 per cent and no error compliance of 70 per cent, 
overall performance compliance computes at 90      /H11003      8 0       /H11003      70 per cent, 
or only 50 per cent.  
    4 .       Increased technical cooperation  : suppliers and customers can share 
customer and technical information to reduce risk, share costs and 
improve the probability of new product success. 
   Figure 11.4    sets out the beneﬁ ts that retailer Tesco believes they enjoy from 
their strategic sourcing programme, and  Figure 11.5    names a number 
of American, European and Australian retailers and manufacturers that 
have pursued vendor reduction programmes. You will see the results 
that some companies, like British Home Stores, Ford, SEAT, Shell Retail 
Tesco claims several advantages:
Lower costs
Improved investment climate
Better product quality
Improved logistics
Better product development
… and one danger:
Supplier complacency
 Figure 11.4 
      Tesco beneﬁ ts from 
vendor reduction 
programmes    

===== PAGE 345 =====
 
322 Customer Relationship Management
and Xerox, have achieved by applying vendor reduction across the 
entire organization. The data on Compaq and Laura Ashley indicate the 
economies that are feasible within a particular area, such as logistics. 
    Category management 
   In recent years a number of retailers have introduced category 
management, in collaboration with brand manufacturers, as a means 
of improving business performance. Traditionally, retailers have 
bought brands from manufacturers, very often on deals, and then 
merchandised and promoted furiously to reduce inventory levels. 
Category management differs from this brand-centric procurement 
model, and can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 Category management is the management of a group of related or 
substitutable products as a single strategic business unit. 
   The focus is not on brands, but on categories such as shampoos, cereals, 
women’s underwear and children’s shoes. Category management has 
been described as: 
    ‘ a management system (that) aims to reduce the distance from supplier 
to customer by deﬁ  ning and managing product categories, rather than 
individual brands, in an environment of enhanced mutual trust and 
cooperation between manufacturer and retailer ’ .12
  Category managers are responsible for integrating procurement, pricing 
and merchandising of all brands in a category and jointly developing and 
implementing category-based plans with manufacturers, to enhance the 
outcomes for both parties. 13   The retailer will often work with a  ‘ category 
captain ’ , usually a brand leader in the category, to create the category 
plan. The captain will be responsible for assembling a network of co-
suppliers to contribute to the category. Jointly, the category captain and 
retailer decide upon product assortment, promotions, pricing, placement 
and space allocation, and new product development. Category plans 
strive to meet the needs of the retailer, suppliers and customers alike. 
British Home Stores (UK) - from 1,000 product suppliers to 80, of
 whom 35 supply 80% of BHS’s retail
assortment
Shell Retail (UK) - from 50 product suppliers to 30
Laura Ashley (UK) - from 8 logistics vendors to 1
Xerox (USA) - from 5000 suppliers to 400 in 5 years
Compaq (USA) - from 35 logistics vendors to 5
Ford (USA) - from 3200 suppliers to 2100 in 6 years
SEAT (Spain) - from 1500 suppliers to 300 in 2 years
Woolworths (Australia) - from 2000 product suppliers to 300
Wattyl (Australia) - from 100 suppliers to 10
 Figure 11.5 
      Vendor reduction 
programmes from 
around the world    

===== PAGE 346 =====
 
Managing supplier and partner relationships 323
   Category management requires the retailer and supplier to establish 
close links that enable them to agree category objectives, optimize the 
category assortment, introduce new products, de-list brands or items 
that do not contribute to category performance and plot category or 
brand promotions. Category management is enabled by IT applications 
such as EDI, electronic funds transfer and activity-based costing. 
   Category management is sometimes cited as a win–win strategy 
for both retailer and manufacturer, potentially capable of generating a 
number of beneﬁ ts, as shown in  Figure 11.6     
14   However, the consultants 
McKinsey  &  Company warn that most of the beneﬁ  ts from category 
management are skewed in favour of the retailer. 15   Indeed, research 
conﬁ rms that retailers enjoy higher prices and higher proﬁ  ts under 
category management than do competitors with traditional brand 
procurement strategies. Higher retailer proﬁ  ts are only achieved under 
certain conditions, particularly when interbrand competition is high and 
consumer store switching is low. Few economic beneﬁ  ts exist for the 
retailer when these conditions are absent.  16
Benefits for supplier Benefits for retailer
Increased profitability
Increased business knowledge
Improved relationships
with retailers
Financial:
Increased sales
Increased margins
Reduced costs
Improved efficiency
Increased market share
Non-financial:
Organizational learning
More effective strategy implementation
Better customer service
Improved customer knowledge
Understanding cost structures
More open communications with suppliers
Improved personal relationships
Stability of best practice  Figure 11.6 
      Category 
management
beneﬁ ts    
    Product development 
alliances
   It is becoming more common for companies to cooperate with their 
suppliers in product improvement and new product development 
programmes. Supplier competencies can be used to reduce development 
costs and accelerate time to market. For example, suppliers may be able 
to advise on cheaper or better speciﬁ  cations for the product. They may 
share some of the cost burden if they are assured of being a key supplier 

===== PAGE 347 =====
 
324 Customer Relationship Management
when the product is eventually brought to market. Suppliers may 
even be the original source of new product ideas for their customers. 
Technical Felts, a manufacturer of air ﬁ  ltration felts, membranes and 
fabrics, partners with signiﬁ  cant customers to develop application-
speciﬁ c solutions to those customers ’  air quality problems. 
  Collaboration platforms provide a set of technological tools and an 
information environment for collaboration between businesses developing 
new products. These platforms enable the alignment and integration of 
processes or work from geographically-separated network members. For 
example, Boeing has established virtual design teams with its suppliers 
to work on aircraft design projects. Technology companies working on 
systems integration projects for clients that have multinational sites are 
also linked by these collaborative platforms.
       Case 11.3   
  Cooperation between electronics components suppliers and OEMs 
in the automobile industry      
   Signiﬁ cant cooperation between electronics components suppliers and OEMs, such as 
Toyota and BMW, underpins brand success. Innovations in automotive electronics have 
become increasingly complex, resulting in high-end vehicles containing more than 70 
electronic control units and offering a variety of functions to the driver. In-vehicle telematics 
and infotainment systems provide services like digital radio, broadcast services, television, 
global positioning systems and MP3 audio. Future applications and services will integrate 
information sources available outside and inside the car, requiring vehicle systems 
connecting invehicle consumer electronics devices with the outside world in order to realize 
the vision of an intelligent networked car, connected with the environment and providing 
the driver with information according to his demands. There is now very close cooperation 
between automobile brand owners and components suppliers. Automobile manufacturers do 
not have the inhouse competencies to develop these electronics applications independently. 
   Source: Bosch GmbH  17
    Electronic procurement 
  Another trend in supplier relationship management is the development 
of electronic procurement. There is a strong economic incentive for 
companies to transact with suppliers online, and equally for suppliers 
to offer online procurement to their customers. For customers, online 
purchasing offers the prospect of reduced procurement costs and 
immediate order placement. One signiﬁ cant feature of online procurement 
is disintermediation (the elimination of one or more intermediaries 
from the supply chain). In other words, buyers can interact directly with 
suppliers and enjoy cost savings and communication direct to suppliers. 
   Suppliers, in turn, are motivated to sell direct to customers because 
it offers the prospect of three beneﬁ  ts: reduced customer management 

===== PAGE 348 =====
 
Managing supplier and partner relationships 325
costs, enhanced control over the customer experience and enhanced 
cash ﬂ ow due to immediate payment. Banks have found that transaction 
costs are dramatically reduced. Transaction costs over the Internet are 
one-tenth of branch-based costs. Even telephone-based transactions 
are less than one-half the cost of branch transactions. In the travel 
business, distribution costs for a $1000 package holiday are $150 if sold 
on commission through a travel agent, but $20 if sold direct over the 
Internet. These lower costs can be passed on to customers in the form 
of lower prices. The investment company Fidelity, for example, charges 
3.25 per cent of the value of a purchase when a retail customer uses a 
standard paper-based application form to buy shares in mutual funds; 
when the purchase is made online the charge is only 1 per cent. 
   The trend towards electronic procurement is found in both business-
to-business and business-to-consumer contexts. 
    Business-to-consumer e-commerce 
  Although the volume of consumer purchasing made online varies 
from country to country, and from product to product, the USA is still 
the marketplace in which online purchasing is at its most advanced. 
According to the US Census Bureau, in 2003 70 million American 
households (62 per cent of households) had one or more computers, up 
from 56 per cent in 2001, and sixty-two million households (55 per cent of 
households) had Internet access, up from 50 per cent in 2001. The Internet 
has become an integral part of the US economy. Eighteen per cent of 
adults conducted banking online in 2003. Twelve per cent of adults used 
the Internet to search for a job. Nearly half the adult population (47 per 
cent) used the Internet to ﬁ nd information on products or services. About 
one-third of adults (32 per cent) actually purchased a product or service 
online, compared with 2.1 per cent of adults who used the Internet for 
shopping in 1997. 
18   The trend is upward as consumers become more 
conﬁ dent in their remote shopping behaviours. 
   Forecasting consumer spending on the Internet is a dangerous 
occupation. In 1998, for example, it was forecast that 7 per cent of 
consumer expenditure would be online by the end of the century.  19
That did not happen. In 2006, US business-to-consumer e-commerce 
accounted for just 2.8 per cent of total retail sales, up from 2.4 per cent in 
2005.
20   The categories that dominate consumer spending are computer 
hardware, movie and event tickets, automotive, ofﬁ  ce supplies, 
consumer electronics and child and baby products.  21
   Companies manage their customer interface on the Internet in different 
ways. Some companies only take orders online. Others also receive 
payment online. A few also deliver their product online, for example, 
software companies. Generally, shoppers like the convenience and speed 
of online purchasing and they expect to enjoy a price advantage over 
their bricks-and-mortar shopping.  
    Business-to-business e-commerce 
   B2B e-commerce is a much more signiﬁ  cant phenomenon than 
B2C e-commerce. The US Census Bureau reports that in 2005 

===== PAGE 349 =====
 
326 Customer Relationship Management
business-to-business e-commerce, which they deﬁ  ne as transactions 
by manufacturers and merchant wholesalers, accounted for 92 per 
cent of all e-commerce. Evidence indicates that B2B e-commerce relies 
overwhelmingly on proprietary electronic data interchange (EDI) 
systems.22   Experts generally agree that the value of transactions in B2B 
e-commerce is about ten times the value of B2C e-commerce. 
  In the USA 27 per cent of the total shipments by value of manufactured 
output was sold online. The industries with the largest percentage of online 
sales were transport equipment manufacturing (53 per cent) and beverage 
and tobacco manufacturing (49 per cent). Eighteen per cent of merchant 
wholesaler trade sales were completed online in the same year.  
23   The trend 
for both manufacturer and merchant wholesaler online sales is upward. 
   B2B e-commerce is growing quickly because entry costs are very low. 
It can cost as little as $1000 to design a brochure-type website, with 
ongoing annual costs of web-hosting and site maintenance of only a few 
hundred dollars. In addition, for companies that choose not to use EDI, 
web-based trading employs open networks and standards delivering 
a much higher degree of interactivity and ﬂ  exibility. The Internet is 
ubiquitous, accessible and cheap. 
   Timmers has provided a useful taxonomy of business models in 
B2B e-commerce.  
24   Among the B2B models he recognizes are e-shops, 
e-procurement, e-malls, e-auctions and third-party marketplaces. 
●       E-shops  we normally associate with B2C e-commerce, but some B2B 
enterprises also enable customers to purchase online. Customers 
anticipate lower prices, better information and greater convenience. 
Site operators expect enhanced revenues from reduced cost, increased 
sales and possibly the sale of advertising space, such as banner ads. 
Hewlett Packard’s small and medium-sized business customers can 
buy direct online. 
25   Some company websites, such as  www.dell.com  
devote sections of their websites to corporate purchasing, as distinct 
from the household section.  
●       E-procurement  involves the electronic tendering and procurement 
of goods and services. Japan Airlines, for example, procures some of 
its supplies through its web presence. For the customer, anticipated 
beneﬁ ts include wider choice of suppliers, lower input costs 
and reduced transaction costs due to automation of the process. 
E-procurement may be accompanied by electronic negotiation and 
contracting. Customers and suppliers might also perform collaborative 
speciﬁ cation. Suppliers hope they will have the opportunity to submit 
more tenders, perhaps globally and experience lower tendering costs. 
●      A n   e-mall  is a collection of e-shops on a single site. PTplace.com is 
an e-mall established by industrial components distributors for 
industrial components distributors. Distributors of Barden, Cooper, 
Dodge/Reliance, Drives Inc., FAG, Gates, INA, MRC, SKF or Timken 
products can shop for components at the one location, placing orders 
electronically, checking order status, availability and obtaining 
customized pricing. Each brand has its own shop at the site.  
●       E-auctions  are electronic versions of conventional auctions. They 
feature electronic bidding, sometimes linked with payment and 
delivery. Some are enhanced by multimedia presentations of the 

===== PAGE 350 =====
 
Managing supplier and partner relationships 327
goods being auctioned. Beneﬁ ts for suppliers and customers include 
increased efﬁ ciency in buying and selling. Websites such as  www.
liquidation.com ,  www.graysonline.com.au  and even eBay conduct 
auctions of commercial and industrial equipment and supplies.  
●       Third-party marketplaces   are buyer–seller websites that are 
operated by third parties. Microsoft has a third party marketplace for 
companies whose products and services may suit Microsoft’s small 
business customers. 26   Sometimes, an entrepreneurial third party forms 
a strategic alliance with key partners to establish the marketplace. This 
was the case with Hospitalitybex which was established in Singapore 
in 2000 to serve as an electronic marketplace for the hospitality 
industry. Hospitalitybex was initially set up with a small number 
of industry partners, with the primary objective of streamlining the 
procurement process. It provides a one-stop destination for product 
and service sourcing, negotiation, selection, ordering, fulﬁ  lment, 
payment and reporting for the now 4000 organizational members.  
27
  Not all of these e-commerce options are necessarily relational in character. 
E-auctions, for example, are compatible with a very transactional view of 
supplier relationships. Each auction can be viewed as a unique event in 
which participants buy and sell as if there were no history linking them. 
However, we are seeing evidence of co-opetition, that is, cooperation 
between competitors, to secure better deals on input raw materials 
and goods. For example, keen rivals Unilever and Procter and Gamble 
cooperate in the procurement of raw materials for manufacturing. 
    Partners 
  Relationships with business partners also need to be managed so that they 
can contribute to the achievement of CRM goals. We are not using the term 
 ‘ partner ’  in this section in the same way that some CRM technology ﬁ rms 
use it. Many technology ﬁ  rms offer what they call partner relationship 
management (PRM) applications. These applications help vendors 
manage their relationships with channel members, such as retailers and 
value added resellers (VAR). PRM is best thought of as the deployment of 
CRM tools for the management of relationships with a particular segment, 
that is, the channel member or partner. We examine PRM later in the book. 
   In this chapter we deﬁ  ne the main function of partners as helping 
companies create and deliver value to their customers. They are the 
 ‘ P ’  in the SCOPE model that was introduced in Chapter 10.  Figure 11.7    
identiﬁ es a number of different types of partners, divided into groups 
focused either on value creation or on value delivery.  
    Partners in value creation 
   We can identify a number of different types of partner in value creation: 
joint venture or alliance partners, category teams, benchmarking groups, 
regulators, customer advocacy groups and sponsors. 

===== PAGE 351 =====
 
328 Customer Relationship Management
    Strategic alliances 
  The terms  ‘ joint venture ’ ,  ‘ strategic alliance ’  and  ‘ business partnership ’  
tend to be used interchangeably. Indeed there is no clear consensus on 
the differences, if any, between these terms. They all feature interﬁ  rm 
cooperation. Partners in joint ventures or alliances maintain their own 
strategic autonomy while simultaneously establishing activity links, 
resource ties and actor bonds between the partner organizations for 
particular purposes. When British Airways and American Airlines agreed 
to coordinate routes, schedules and reservation systems, this was an 
alliance. It was neither a merger nor an acquisition. Both retained their 
autonomy. Alliances may involve two or more companies, two or more 
nations and two or more jurisdictions. They can be highly complex entities 
with no clear legal status. Equally they can be very simple arrangements. 
   Not all alliances are strategic. To be so they must contribute to 
the strategic goals of both organizations. You would expect to ﬁ  nd a 
more balanced contribution and participation in a strategic alliance. 
Historically, many joint ventures (JV) have been initiated to enable a 
dominant partner to enter a minor partner’s market. Essentially, the JV 
served as an export channel and there was little strategic value for the 
minor player. More recently, however, many JVs have featured bilateral 
or multilateral cooperation between partners in the development of new 
products for sale in the partners ’  and other markets.
Joint venture or alliance
partners
Category teams
Benchmarking partners
Regulators
Customer advocacy groups
Sponsors
Agents
Brokers
Management contractors
Consortia
Franchisees
Licensees
Partners in value creation Partners in value delivery
 Figure 11.7 
      Partners in the 
SCOPE model of 
CRM    
       Case 11.4   
  The STAR Alliance      
   The STAR Alliance is an alliance between 17 international and 3 regional airlines serving 
855 destinations in 155 countries. The international members are Air Canada, Air New 
Zealand, All Nippon Airways, Asiana Airways, Austrian Airlines, BMI, LOT, Lufthansa, 
SAS, Singapore Airlines, South African Airways, Spanair, Swiss, TAP Portugal, Thai Airways 
International, United Airlines and US Airways. 

===== PAGE 352 =====
 
Managing supplier and partner relationships 329
   There are a number of different types of alliances. Broadly they can 
be classiﬁ ed into alliances between non-competing ﬁ  rms and alliances 
between competitors (known as co-opetition). 
    Alliances between non-
competing ﬁ rms 
  There are three main strategic motives behind alliances between non-
competing ﬁ rms: market expansion, vertical integration or diversiﬁ cation.  28
    Market expansion 
   Companies may enter into JVs to develop new domestic or international 
markets. Renault formed a JV with DINA (Diesel Nacional, SA) in order 
to enter the Mexican market. When Procter and Gamble decided to enter 
the Chinese market, they formed a JV with Guanzhou Lonkey Industrial 
Company (GLIC). P & G brought its technology and manufacturing 
expertise to the table. GLIC brought its distribution network and local 
knowledge. In the USA, medical clinics are establishing partnerships 
with retailers such as Wal-Mart, Target and the drug-store chain CVS 
to offer convenient and low-cost treatment for minor illnesses and 
injuries. In Brazil, Bradesco Bank has grown its credit portfolio through 
partnerships with retail chains that offer loans to poorer consumers.  
    Vertical integration 
   Vertical partnerships bring together neighbours in the supply or demand 
chain. Aerospatiale and Thomson set up a vertical partnership called 
   The Star Alliance network was established in 1997 as the ﬁ rst global airline alliance to offer 
customers worldwide reach and a seamless travel experience. In 2006 the alliance ﬂ  ew 405 
million passengers, 859 billion passenger kilometers, on 16 000 daily departures with a ﬂ  eet 
of 2777 aircraft, generating US$115 billion. Passengers who are members of one of the Star 
Alliance airline frequent ﬂ  yer programmes are able to earn miles or points on all qualifying 
ﬂ ights across the Star Alliance network. Star Alliance Silver and Star Alliance Gold status 
are additional beneﬁ ts that passengers become entitled to when they reach a higher status in 
an individual airline frequent ﬂ  yer programme. Start Alliance Gold beneﬁ ts include priority 
wait-listing, priority airport standby (where allowed by law), priority check-in, priority 
boarding (where available), extra baggage allowance and worldwide lounge access. Other 
member beneﬁ ts include reduced waiting times and faster connections, because member 
airlines are located close to each other or share positions. Not only do passengers beneﬁ  t, 
but so do the airlines. They experience economies of scale in purchasing everything from 
toilet paper to aircraft, shared costs estimated at over US$1.5 billion, shared technology and 
shared airport positions. 

===== PAGE 353 =====
 
330 Customer Relationship Management
Sextant Avionique. Thomson manufactures avionics and electronic 
equipment used by Aerospatiale in its aircraft and helicopters. They 
formed a 50:50 JV to manufacture and design new forms of equipment 
for the aerospace industry. Pepsi acquired part of Pizza Hut, KFC and 
Taco Bell to secure access to the restaurant market segment.  
    Diversiﬁ cation 
  Alliances aimed at diversiﬁ cation feature cross-industry agreements. BMW 
and Rolls Royce got together to establish a JV to enable BMW to enter the 
aircraft engine market. JVs may be initiated when technologies begin to 
converge. Philips and DuPont have cooperated in the development of an 
optical disk system for data storage. 
    Alliances between 
competing ﬁ rms 
  Alliances between competitors seem paradoxical. How can competitors 
cooperate? Research suggests that perhaps 70 per cent of alliances are 
between competitors. 29   There are, again, three main types of alliances 
between competitors: shared supply alliances, quasi-concentration 
alliances and complementary alliances. 
    Shared supply alliances 
   This happens when competitors get together to experience economies 
of scale on the manufacture of some component or some stage of the 
manufacturing process. Volkswagen and Renault jointly manufacture 
automatic gearboxes. The European market for automatic transmission 
cars is only 8 per cent of the overall car market. Together, because 
of the volumes, they generate economies that they could not enjoy 
independently, as they cooperate in research and development and 
manufacturing.
    Quasi-concentration alliances 
   In a quasi-concentration alliance the parties collaborate for the creation 
of a product that the consortium then offers to the market. In other non-
consortium activities the parties compete as usual. An example is the 
development of the Tornado ﬁ  ghter plane by BAe, DASA and Alenia. 
Given the huge capital costs it made little sense for the three to compete 
in the market independently. Quite possibly none of them would have 
made a return on their investment in the project. Collectively they were 
able to pool their resources and develop a product, the manufacture of 
which was shared among the three partners.  

===== PAGE 354 =====
 
Managing supplier and partner relationships 331
    Complementary alliances 
  In a complementary alliance, partners bring different competencies to 
the alliance. Commonly, one partner has developed a new product that 
is distributed through the other party’s distribution network. Ford sold 
rebadged Mazda cars, and Chrysler sold Mitsubishi cars in the USA. 
Chrysler only sold those models that ﬁ lled gaps in Chrysler’s product line.   
    Category teams 
  You read earlier in this chapter about the trend towards category 
management. A category team consists of the network of brand principals 
that contribute to a category offer by a retailer. The retailer, in partnership 
with the category captain, decides which brands and lines to stock. The 
UKs count line confectionary market contains a number of  ‘ must-have ’  
brands manufactured by Mars, Nestlé and Cadbury. Whoever serves as 
category captain, these three manufacturers must be offered shelf space. 
    Benchmarking partners 
   Benchmarking is deﬁ ned as follows: 
 Benchmarking is a business improvement discipline involving 
the continuous, systematic evaluation of products, services and 
processes against organizations that are recognized as representing 
best practice. 
   Xerox, the copier company, is reputed to have originated benchmarking. 
Xerox’s patents expired towards the end of the 1970s. As that happened, 
Japanese competitors like Canon introduced their products to the US 
market. To Xerox’s alarm, they did so at a retail price that was lower than 
Xerox’s manufacturing costs. Xerox began a benchmarking programme 
to ﬁ nd out what they could do to match and better the Japanese. 
  One of the key components of the benchmarking process is the selection 
of benchmarking partners (see Figure 11.8   ). A common misunderstanding 
about benchmarking is that it is simply a matter of identifying and 
learning from best in class companies. It is not so. Benchmark groups are 
networks of companies who expect mutual gain from their participation. 
   The benchmarking group may be internal to a company, intra or 
trans-industry. Each has their value, depending upon the benchmarking 
objective. For example, if you are a bank wanting to identify the practices 
which generate the highest average deposits per account, you would 
want to create an internal benchmarking group. 
  An intra-industry benchmarking group has been established by 18 
corporations in the telecommunications industry, including AT & T, 
Nynex, MCI and GTE. They are learning from each other by sharing 

===== PAGE 355 =====
 
332 Customer Relationship Management
their knowledge of customer satisfaction, new product development and 
customer service. 
  A trans-industry group of benchmarking participants from FedEx, 
Caterpillar, Westinghouse and DuPont was established to learn from 
each other about best practices in the area of ﬁ nancial management. The 
London Benchmarking Group (LBG) is a group of over 100 companies 
working together to measure corporate community investment (CCI). 
   Participants usually have concerns about disclosure of competitively 
sensitive information to their benchmarking partners. For this reason, 
codes of practice have been developed. These include the Benchmarking 
Code of Conduct of the American Productivity and Quality Centre, and 
the European Benchmarking Code of Conduct.  
30
   Benchmarking groups can have signiﬁ  cant impact on the creation 
of customer value. GPT Payphone Systems manufactures payphones, 
phonecards and payphone management systems for customers in 80 
countries. It set up a benchmarking programme to identify best practice 
in receiving and managing customer returns. As a result it set up and 
rolled out a barcode booking-in system for returns that also served to 
track repairs, and a buffer stock system for replacing returned goods. 
The result was a 99.7 per cent success rate in next day replacement, and 
a considerable increase in customer satisfaction.  
31
Decide what
to benchmark
Form a
benchmarking
team
Identify
benchmarking
partners
Collect and
analyse
benchmarking
information
Take
corrective
action
 Figure 11.8 
      The benchmarking 
process    
       Case 11.5   
  Benchmarking at Avon Cosmetics      
   In the USA, Avon Cosmetics ’  immediate customers are the 450 000 sales representatives 
that sell Avon products to the end consumer. Fifteen per cent of this sales-force generates 
50 per cent of sales. Avon established an internal benchmarking study to identify and share 
best practice within and across the company’s ﬁ  ve geographic sales regions. The objective 
was to improve branch productivity through a range of process improvements. Among 
the outcomes were changes to the way managers were trained in the use of the company’s 
IT system, an improved call management system and regular meetings between customer 
service supervisors to share ideas and experiences. 

===== PAGE 356 =====
 
Managing supplier and partner relationships 333
    Regulators 
   Many industries are regulated, particularly those in which consumers 
are thought to be at risk either because of deregulation or because 
of monopolistic competition. These include ﬁ  nancial services, 
telecommunications, rail, gas, electricity and airlines. 
   In the UK, Ofcom is the regulator for the communications industries, 
with responsibilities across television, radio, telecommunications and 
wireless communications services. Under the Communications Act 2003, 
Ofcom’s statutory duties are: 
  ‘ to further the interests of citizens in relation to communications 
matters; and to further the interests of consumers in relevant 
markets, where appropriate by promoting competition ’ .
  A close relationship with regulators allows communications companies 
to ensure that they are not in breach of regulations or legislation, and 
have early knowledge of, and perhaps inﬂ uence, forthcoming regulations 
or legislation. The regulator’s ofﬁ ce is also a source of useful insight into 
the issues that are worrying customers. Ofcom, for example, operates a 
complaints-handling process and conducts consumer research. Ofcom’s 
investigation of the consumer experience of the ﬁ  xed and mobile, 
Internet and digital broadcasting markets aimed at measuring how well 
consumers are faring in respect of choice, price and range; availability 
and take-up; awareness, comparing and switching; protection and 
concerns.
    Customer advocacy groups 
   Customer advocacy groups (CAGs) promote and protect the interests 
of consumers. CAGs operate within many countries. There is the 
Consumers ’  Association of Canada, the Consumers ’  Association of 
Singapore and the Consumers ’  Association of Iceland, for example. 
  In the UK, the Consumers ’  Association, publishers of  Which?  magazines 
and books, is a not-for-proﬁ t organization which has been researching and 
campaigning on behalf of consumers since it was founded in 1957. With 
over 650 000 members, it is the largest consumer organization in Europe. 
Its mission is to  ‘ make individuals as powerful as the organizations they 
have to deal with in their daily lives ’ .
32
   There are some international consumer advocacy groups too. 
Consumers International (CI) is a federation of national consumer 
associations that ‘ defends the rights of all consumers, particularly the 
poor and marginalized, through empowering national consumer groups 
and campaigning at the international level ’ .33   CI represents over 220 
member organizations in 115 countries. It focuses on issues such as food 
distribution, health care and globalization. 

===== PAGE 357 =====
 
334 Customer Relationship Management
   CAGs can have direct inﬂ  uence on corporate behaviour, and 
indirect inﬂ  uence through lobbying activity. During the 1970s the UKs 
Consumers ’  Association (CA) developed its role as a campaigning body 
and lobby group. In 1972 it was instrumental in the establishment of the 
Ofﬁ ce of Consumer Unions (BEUC) which lobbies consumer issues to 
the EC in Brussels. The CA claims responsibility for several important 
Acts of Parliament which have improved the position of consumers, 
including the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977, the Consumer Agreements 
Arbitration Act 1988, the Property Misdescriptions Act 1991, the Cheques 
Act 1992 and the Sale and Supply of Goods Act 1994. The CA has recently 
campaigned to curtail the marketing of low quality food to children, 
to lift safety in the cosmetic surgery industry and to reduce bank 
charges. 
   Individual activists may also be worth considering as part of the  ‘ P ’
constituency of SCOPE. For example Ralph Nader, the American lawyer 
and consumer activist, wields considerable inﬂ  uence. His 1965 book, 
Unsafe at Any Speed , detailed the carelessness of the American automobile 
industry in producing unsafe vehicles. A particular target was General 
Motors with its fragile Corvair. Nader wrote: 
    ‘ A great problem of contemporary life is how to control the power of 
economic interests which ignore the harmful effects of their applied 
science and technology ’ .
34
   The book led to congressional hearings and a series of automobile 
safety laws were passed in 1966. Since 1966, Nader has agitated for the 
introduction of at least eight major federal consumer protection laws, 
including the motor vehicle safety laws and the Safe Drinking Water Act. 
He has been involved in the launching of federal regulatory agencies, 
such as the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), the 
Environment Protection Agency (EPA) and the Consumer Product Safety 
Administration. Nader had input into the recall of millions of defective 
motor vehicles and also improved access to government through the 
Freedom of Information Act of 1974.  
35
   Some consumer advocacy groups concentrate on single industries, 
for example the Timeshare Consumers ’  Association which aims to  ‘ help 
make timeshare an enjoyable, value-for-money form of holidaying for 
consumers ’ .36   Pharmaceutical companies work with and through patient 
advocacy groups (PAGs) to achieve the aims of both the advocacy 
group and themselves (see Case 11.6). PAGs are established to represent 
the interests of sufferers from disease, their families and carers. In the 
UK, for example, there are the National Schizophrenia Fellowship 
(NSF), Depression Alliance, SANE, Parkinson’s Disease Society, British 
Diabetic Association, National Osteoporosis Society, Amarant Trust, 
Terence Higgins Trust, Women Health Concern, Aids Treatment Project, 
Wellbeing, Macmillan Cancer Relief, the British Heart Foundation and 
many others. The relationship between the pharmaceutical company and 
PAG can be mutually beneﬁ cial.  
37

===== PAGE 358 =====
 
Managing supplier and partner relationships 335
    Sponsors 
  Although sponsors are generally insigniﬁ cant in the for-proﬁ  t context, 
they play a much more important role in the not-for-proﬁ t (NFP) context. 
Indeed, sponsors may be the principal source of income for the NFP . 
   Sponsorship can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 Sponsorship is the material or ﬁ  nancial support of some property, 
normally sports, arts or causes, with which an organization is not 
normally associated in the course of its everyday business. 
  The relationship between sponsor and sponsored is one in which the 
sponsor pays a cash or in-kind fee in return for access to the exploitable 
commercial potential associated with the property. Overall, in 2006, 
global expenditure on sponsorship hit US$34 billion. 
38   There has been 
signiﬁ cant growth in sponsorship in recent years. This has been attributed 
to several conditions: the perceived ineffectiveness and inefﬁ  ciency of 
advertising; government restrictions on tobacco and alcohol advertising; 
reduced government assistance to the arts; increased popularity and 
commercialism of sports and arts; the increasing trend to globalization of 
corporate/brand entities; and the progress of relationship marketing.  
39
       Case 11.6   
  Hoechst-Roussel aligns with patient advocacy groups      
   When Hoechst-Roussel Pharmaceutical launched Trental (pentoxifylline) for the treatment 
of intermittent claudication, an early form of peripheral arterial disease, its marketing 
management tried to reach senior citizens, the primary market for Trental, by launching 
an educational programme. Most older people did not view the major symptom of this 
condition – leg cramps or pain while walking – as a disease; rather they interpreted the 
symptoms as a normal part of ageing and, therefore, they did not seek treatment or even 
tell their physicians about the problem. The programme was unsuccessful until Hoechst 
decided to reach the senior population in a more effective and credible way through the 
development of a relationship with the National Council on Ageing (NCOA), a non-proﬁ  t 
American resource of information, training, advocacy, and research on all aspects of ageing. 
The result was a national NCOA-sponsored public service education programme called  ‘ Leg 
Alert ’ . At its core, Leg Alert was a medical screening programme. In the programme’s ﬁ  rst 
year, local Leg Alert screening events were held in communities across the national; local 
co-sponsors typically were an NCOA member centre, a local television station, and a local 
shopping mall, which also hosted the screening. Local physicians directed each event and 
served as programme spokespersons. The programme’s ﬁ  rst-year success – measured by 
such criteria as number of persons screened, media impressions achieved and product sales – 
was so great that Leg Alert  ‘ how-to ’  screening handbooks now have been developed and 
distributed to senior centres and hospitals. 

===== PAGE 359 =====
 
336 Customer Relationship Management
  Sponsors are looking for a number of commercial gains from sponsorship 
including:
    1.     Increasing awareness and visibility for the product or company 
    2 .      I n ﬂ uencing consumer attitudes  
    3 .      I n ﬂ uencing consumer behaviour  
    4.     Associating the product or company with a lifestyle 
    5.     Entertaining key clients 
    6.     Rewarding employees 
    7.     Finding opportunities to launch new products  
    8.     Differentiating the product or company from competitors.    
   For example, the cigarette manufacturer Rothmans sponsored the 
Williams Formula 1 motor racing team. Their objectives in sponsoring 
motorsport were to: increase awareness of their brands, encourage 
consumer trial and purchase of brands and maintain loyalty towards 
their more established products.  
40
   Organizations that enjoy the support of sponsors are common in the 
arts, sports or causes. However, trends indicate that such organizations 
are becoming more professional in seeking revenue streams from other 
sources. They are ﬁ  nding that they compete for limited sponsorship 
funds and that they must make a business case and deliver to the 
sponsors objectives in order to maintain the relationship.  
    Partners in value delivery 
  We identify a number of different types of partners in value delivery: 
agents, brokers, management contractors, consortia, franchisees and 
licensees. These might be thought of as customers under the ‘ C ’  of 
SCOPE. However, what sets this group apart from customers is that they 
do not take title to the products they sell. They do not therefore generate 
direct revenue streams for the focal company. 
41   Partners in value delivery 
are an integral part of many CRM implementations. In many cases, end 
customers regard them as the suppliers of the goods, rather than the 
manufacturer. 
    Agents 
  Agents are commonly used when a business is small or geographically 
separated from the markets served and it doesn’t want or cannot afford 
to recruit and operate its own sales team. Agents do not purchase and 
resell; they simply represent the principals whose products they sell. 
They are order providers, offering business owners the opportunity 
to access their established networks. Agents generally work on a 
commission basis. Agencies are common in the fashion industry. Apparel 
manufacturers broadly split into two groups. Large international, 
national or regional brands such as Bennetton, Nike and Giordano tend 
to operate at the high-volume end of the fashion market. Brands such as 

===== PAGE 360 =====
 
Managing supplier and partner relationships 337
Sass and Bide, Michelle Jank and Tea Rose tend to operate at the other 
extreme, selling through few outlets, known as  ‘ destination outlets ’  at 
higher prices. Whereas the former have their own sales teams, the latter 
tend to operate through agencies. 
   Agents representing manufacturers fall into two major categories. 
    1.     Manufacturer’s agents represent one or more principals that produce 
non-competing lines. They provide an outsourced selling function. 
Generally they agree contractual terms covering lines sold, territorial 
rights, prices, commissions, order processing routines and returns 
policy.  
    2.     A selling agent is contracted to sell a manufacturer’s entire output. 
Very often these are found in primary and production-oriented 
businesses such as mining, forestry and industrial equipment. 
   CRM systems can assist the manufacturer–agent relationship in several 
ways. They can provide a portal through which product information is 
published, marketing funds are approved and order progress is tracked. 
Furthermore, agents themselves are users of CRM systems, as they 
communicate and sell to their clients.  
    Brokers 
   The role of the broker is to bring together buyer and seller. Brokers can 
be hired by either party. They assume no risk. Common examples are 
food brokers, real estate brokers and insurance brokers.  
    Management contractors 
  Management contractors are companies that undertake to manage some 
important part of a business, even the customer interface, on behalf of 
a principal. They are common in the hospitality industry, where the 
ownership and operation of hotels are separated. It is not unusual for 
hotels to be owned by an insurance or investment company, and for 
the operation of the hotel to be contracted out to a hotel management 
company. Contractors manage properties for well-known brand owners 
such as Holiday Inn, Marriott, Sheraton and Hilton. The contractor 
pays all the operating expenses and retains a management fee, normally 
between 3 per cent and 5 per cent of gross income, remitting the surplus to 
the owner. The owner provides the property, ﬁ xtures, working capital and 
assumes full legal responsibility. The contractor may undertake to manage 
the hotel under the operating standards of their own brand, or manage 
to the standards of another hotel brand. Sometimes hotel management 
companies are brought in to turn around a struggling property. 
  Where a contractor is brought in to manage the customer interface, it 
is in a position to inﬂ  uence customer experience, either positively or 
negatively. It is critical that the contractor understands the experience that 
the principal wants its customers to enjoy. CRM systems allow principals 
to access detailed information about customer interactions, therefore 
enabling them to manage their contractor relationships more effectively. 

===== PAGE 361 =====
 
338 Customer Relationship Management
    Consortia 
  A consortium is a group of organizations that act cooperatively for 
mutual beneﬁ t. Often the organizations are independent of each other, 
as in the Best Western and Flag Hotel consortia, and the members of the 
SPAR group of independent grocery retailers. 
   Sometimes they are not independent. Keiretsu and chaebols are Asian 
examples. Some Japanese companies have formed into keiretsu. The 
keiretsu is a family of interlocked organizations, connected by common 
memberships on boards of directors, shared banking arrangements and 
close personal relationships. Sumitomo and Mitsubishi are examples. In 
Korea, some companies have formed into chaebols. These consortia are 
similar to the keiretsu, but are reliant on close government connections 
for ﬁ nancial support: Daewoo and Samsung are examples. 
   Consortia are generally not-for-proﬁ t organizations, built to generate 
economies of scale for their members. There are economies to be found 
in purchasing, marketing, training and development, and operations. 
Whereas a single hotel could not afford to develop and promote itself 
internationally, as a member of a consortium in which all members pay 
an advertising appropriation, it could create an international presence. 
Similarly, consortia can afford to invest in a centralized reservation 
system, which would be unaffordable to an individual member. 
Consortia members also operate as a cross-referral network. 
   Consortia managements generally establish standards that members 
must meet in their operations. Best Western hotels reject 90 per cent 
of applicants. The consortium’s objective is to create and deliver a 
consistent customer experience wherever they encounter a consortium 
member. Leading Hotels of the World, for example, is a consortium of 
hotels, spas and resorts which stress excellence in service, physical 
structure, cuisine and guest comforts. Failure to meet the required 
standards may result in exclusion.  
    Franchisees 
   Franchising is a rapidly growing form of business. A franchise is a 
license to operate a business format for a prescribed time format within a 
deﬁ ned geographic area. Franchisees receive training in the operational 
and managerial processes for running the format successfully. They get 
access to a proven customer value proposition and a turnkey business 
operation. Typically, a franchise or investment fee is paid up front, as 
well as an ongoing royalty on sales. Franchise operations are among the 
best known in many industries: McDonald’s, Holiday Inn, Century 21, 
Dunkin ’  Donuts, Midas, H & R Block, for example. 
   The relationship between franchisor and franchisee can be conﬂ  icted. 
Sources of conﬂ  ict are generally connected to the asymmetry of the 
power relationship: the sharing of revenues from the franchisee’s 
operation, the level of franchisor support and the degree of franchisor 
control. The franchisor typically demands that franchisees do not 
depart from the approved format. They want customers to have a 
standard experience wherever they encounter the brand. Franchisees, 

===== PAGE 362 =====
 
Managing supplier and partner relationships 339
in turn, may feel that they, the entrepreneurs, know more about the 
strengths and weaknesses of the business format than the principal. 
After all, they come into contact with customers and they have to run 
the operation. If franchisees were found to be changing the product offer 
and modifying processes, the franchisor would most likely terminate the 
contract.
   There is a growing recognition that the franchisor and franchisees 
together can create a mutually beneﬁ  cial network through closer 
cooperation. Mature franchising operations, such as Domino’s Pizza, 
are now committed to learning from their franchisees ’  experiences. They 
no longer believe that headquarters is the source of all innovation and 
knowledge about their business.  
    Licensees 
   Licenses are rights granted to a business partner to exploit intangible 
assets, such as technology, skills, designs or knowledge, in exchange 
for remuneration such as fees or royalties. The value of licensing 
arrangements is estimated to exceed US$150 billion annually. 
   Licensing is commonly linked to the movie industry. Disney 
characters such as Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck have a long history 
of being licensed. Their images appear on a huge range of merchandise, 
from pyjamas to lunch boxes and breakfast cereals. Technology is also 
widely licensed. When Kodak invented the disc camera, it licensed 
the technology to a large number of competitors in order to speed up 
its access to world markets and inhibit competitors ’  investments in 
substitute technologies. Toshiba licenses its technology to Chartered 
Semiconductor Manufacturing. IBM makes over US$2 billion annually 
from licensing its patents. 
   Licensing has spread into the packaged goods market. Allied Domecq 
has licensed the use of the Kahlua brand to the company Herbal 
Enterprise, who are introducing Kahlua Iced Coffee into supermarkets. 
You can also smoke Kahlua cigars. Jack Daniels, the bourbon brand, 
is licensed for use in Jack Daniel’s Grilling Sauces. Licensors seem 
increasingly enthusiastic about these licensing deals, which pay royalties 
of 1 to 7 per cent of retail sales, because they generate out of category 
exposure for their brands and yield additional revenues for relatively 
little risk. 
  As with franchising, licensing arrangements can be fraught with 
difﬁ culties. From the focal company’s perspective it is important to 
ensure that licensees understand the brand values of the property they 
are licensed to exploit. The contract is designed to protect the property 
and ensure that it is used in appropriate applications. Disney would not 
license Donald Duck for use in a pornographic website. 
   CRM technologies play an important role in ensuring current 
standards, marketing material, product speciﬁ  cations and regulations 
are communicated to partners. This relies on technologies for content 
management that allow companies to manage the release of information. 
Network members can then be advised when a product speciﬁ  cation is 
changed or an advertising campaign is about to be released.

===== PAGE 363 =====
 
340 Customer Relationship Management
  References  
       1.         Porter, M. (1985) Competitive advantage: creating and sustaining superior 
performance. New York: Free Press. The value chain is rather outdated 
in some respects. It imagines marketing as something that is done 
after products are made (operations), rather than having a role in 
determining what should be made. It also shows that the endpoint 
of managing the activities in the value chain is improved margin. 
CRM practitioners prefer to think in terms of customer proﬁ  tability 
over the longer-term, rather than margins on individual transactions. 
For an alternative value chain (introduced in Chapter 1) that reﬂ  ects 
this CRM focus see Buttle, F. (2003) Customer relationship management: 
concepts and tools. Oxford: Elsevier.      
       2.         We prefer the term  ‘ supply network management ’  to the more 
conventional term ‘ supply chain management ’ , because it clearly 
acknowledges its systemic rather than linear nature.      
       3.          Parker ,    H.                ( 2000 )        Inter-ﬁ rm collaboration and the new product 
development process .            Industrial Management &  Data Systems        , Vol. 
 100      ( 6 )       , pp.  255  –       260        .  
       4.         Copyright © 2008. European Foundation for Quality Management. 
Used with permission. 
        Summary      
   In this chapter you have learned about the importance of two constituencies in 
the business network: suppliers and partners. Both help focal ﬁ  rms create value for 
themselves and their customers. Whereas suppliers provide the input goods and services 
that companies convert into marketable value propositions, partners cooperate with 
focal companies in other ways to create and deliver value for and from the company’s 
customers. Relationships between suppliers and their customers are becoming 
increasingly cooperative and less conﬂ  icted. Many companies now collaborate closely 
with their suppliers in a number of activities, such as product development, supplier 
accreditation and process alignment. Electronic data interchange (EDI) and portals 
are widely employed to help manage the vendor–customer relationships. The trend 
towards electronic procurement is found in both business-to-business and business-to-
consumer contexts. B2B electronic procurement, which has ten times the value of B2C 
online purchasing, takes a number of forms, including e-shops, e-procurement, e-malls, 
e-auctions and third party marketplaces. Relationships with business partners also need 
to be managed so that they can contribute to the achievement of CRM goals. Companies 
have a number of different types of partners in value creation: joint venture or alliance 
partners, category teams, benchmarking groups, regulators, customer advocacy groups 
and sponsors. There are also a number of different types of partners in value delivery: 
agents, brokers, management contractors, consortia, franchisees and licensees.         

===== PAGE 364 =====
 
Managing supplier and partner relationships 341
       5.         For more information, go to  http://www.efqm.org/ 
       6.          Henkoff ,    R.                ( 1993 )        The hot new seal of quality .            Fortune    , June 28 
pp. 68  –     71            .  
       7.          Bergman ,    B.   and   Klefsjö ,    B.             ( 1994 )        Quality: from customer needs to 
customer satisfaction             .    McGraw-Hill:       London              .  
       8.          Deming ,    W.E.             ( 1986 )        Out of crisis             .  Cambridge ,       MA: Cambridge 
University Press              .  
       9.          Cali ,    J.F.             ( 1993 )        TQM for purchasing management             .  McGraw-Hill :      
 New York              .  
      10.          MacKay ,    D.   and   Rosier ,    M.                ( 1996 )        Measuring organizational beneﬁ ts 
of EDI diffusion: a case of the Australian automotive industry . 
International Journal of Physical Distribution  &  Logistics Management        ,  
Vol.  26      ( 10 )       , pp.  60  –       78        .  
      11.          http:/ /www.cips.org/professionalpractice/faqs/detail.asp?record /H11005
73 . Accessed 6 November 2007. 
      12.          Hutchins ,    R.                ( 1997 )        Category management in the food industry: a 
research agenda .             British Food Journal       , Vol.  99      ( 5 )       , pp.  177  –       180        .  
      13.          Basuroy ,    S.  ,   Mantrala ,    M.K.   and   Walters ,    R.G.                ( 2001 )        The impact of 
category management on retailer prices and performance: theory 
and evidence .             Journal of Marketing       , Vol.  65         , October, pp.  16  –       32            .  
      14.          Hogarth-Scott ,    S.                ( 1995 )        Shifting category management relationships 
in the food distribution channels in the UK and Australia . 
Management Decision       , Vol.  35      ( 4 )       , pp.  310  –       318        .  
      15.          Freedman ,    P .M.  ,   Reyner ,    M.   and   Tochtermann ,    T.                ( 1997 )        European 
category management: look before you leap .  The McKinsey Quarterly       ,  
Vol.  1         , pp.  156  –       164        .  
      16.          Basuroy ,    S.  ,   Mantrala ,    M.K.   and   Walters ,    R.G.                ( 2001 )        The impact of 
category management on retailer prices and performance: theory 
and evidence .             Journal of Marketing       , Vol.  65         , October, pp.  16  –       32            .  
      17.          http://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2005/379 . Accessed 24 
December 2008. 
      18.          http://www.census.gov/prod/2005pubs/p23-208.pdf . Accessed 11 
November 2007. 
      19.         Phillips Trafﬁ ca Limited. (1998) The net effect report. London. 
      20.          http://www.census.gov/mrts/www/data/html/06Q4.html . 
Accessed 11 November 2007. 
      21.          http://www.itfacts.biz/index.php?id     /H11005     P3375 . Accessed 11 
November 2007. 
      22.         US Census Bureau. (2007) E-stats  www.census.gov/estats . Accessed 
11 November 2007. 
      23.         US Census Bureau. (2007) E-stats  www.census.gov/estats . Accessed 
11 November 2007. 
      24.          Timmers ,    P .             ( 2000 )        Electronic commerce: strategies and models for 
business-to-business trading             .  Chichester :       John Wiley              .  
      25.             http://h71016.www7.hp.com/home.asp?oi     /H11005     E9CED & BEID/H11005     19701 & 
SBLID/H11005
      26.             http://ofﬁ ce.microsoft.com/en-us/ofﬁ celive/FX102267171033.aspx       
      27.             http://www1.hospitalitybex.com/hbex/hbex.asp       
      28.         This section is derived largely from Dussuage, P . and Garrette, B. 
(1999) Cooperative strategy: competing successfully through strategic 
alliances. Chichester: John Wiley.      

===== PAGE 365 =====
 
342 Customer Relationship Management
      29.          Morris ,    D.   and   Hergert ,    M.                ( 1987 )        Trends in international 
collaborative agreements .            Columbia Journal of World Business        , Vol. 
 22      ( 2 )       , pp.  15  –       21        .  
      30.          Bendell ,    T.  ,   Boulter ,    L.   and   Goodstadt ,    P .             ( 1998 )        Benchmarking for 
Competitive Advantage             .  London :       Financial Times Pitman Publishing              .  
      31.          Bendell ,    T.  ,   Boulter ,    L.   and   Goodstadt ,    P .             ( 1998 )        Benchmarking for 
Competitive Advantage             .  London :       Financial Times Pitman Publishing              .  
      32.         Which? Annual Report of the Consumers ’  Association, 2005–6. 
      33.         For more details refer to  http://www.consumersinternational.org       
      34.          Nader ,   R.             ( 1965 )        Unsafe at any speed: the designed in dangers of the 
American automobile             .  New York :       Grossman Publishers (out of print)              .  
      35.         For more details refer to  http://www.nader.org       
      36.         For more details refer to  http://www.timeshare.org.uk 
      37.          Buttle ,    F.A.   and   Boldrini ,    J.                ( 2001 )        Customer relationship 
management in the pharmaceutical industry: the role of the patient 
advocacy group .            International Journal of Medical Marketing        , Vol.  1      ( 3 )       , 
February, pp.  203  –       214            .
      38.          http://www.sponsorship.com/Resources/Sponsorship-Spending.
aspx . Accessed 11 November 2007. 
      39.          Quester ,   P .G.   and   Thompson ,    B.                ( 2001 )        Advertising and promotion 
leverage on arts sponsorship effectiveness .            Journal of Advertising 
Research       , Vol.  41      ( 1 )       , January–February, pp.  33  –       47            .  
      40.          Andrews ,    S.   and   Tucker ,    E.             ( 1996 )       Rothmans International: the role 
of sponsorship as a promotional tool            .         The European Case Clearing 
House            , Bedford,  Case no 596–004–1     .   
      41.         Although this is generally true, franchisees often pay a fee up-front 
for rights to use the business format, periodic marketing levies and 
training fees. 

===== PAGE 366 =====
 
    Managing investor and 
employee relationships  
 Chapter 12 

===== PAGE 367 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 368 =====
 
           Chapter objectives      
            By the end of this chapter, you will understand:  
    1.   why investors should understand what is involved in a CRM implementation  
    2.   that the return from an investment in CRM can vary from immediate to long-term  
    3.   how to respond to high levels of investor churn  
    4.   the importance of people to the successful roll-out and operation of CRM 
technology  
    5.   the concepts of internal marketing, empowerment and service proﬁ t chain.         
    Introduction 
   In the last chapter we looked at the role of suppliers and partners in 
the achievement of CRM outcomes. In this chapter we examine two 
other constituencies and their contribution to CRM success: owners or 
investors and employees in the business. 
   Owners and investors can be an important source of capital, in return 
for which they expect growth in shareholder value. Given that CRM 
does not always yield an immediate return, their expectations may need 
to be managed. Employees are critical to the successful deployment 
of CRM. People design and implement the CRM strategy, and they 
use technology tactically. CRM cannot succeed without the ongoing 
commitment of people to the CRM vision, strategy and objectives, and 
their willingness to use the CRM toolkit.  
    Owner/investor relationships 
   Owners and investors are signiﬁ  cant stakeholders in businesses. 
They are an important source of capital that allows businesses to be 
established, to operate and grow, and in return they expect the value of 
that capital to grow. In other words, they want shareholder value to be 
created. Shareholder value can only be created if the business makes a 
return on investment that is greater than the weighted average cost of 
the capital invested in the business (WACC). If the WACC (determined 
by the relative weight and cost of equity and borrowings) is 10 per cent, 
and that capital is invested in the business earning a return of 20 per 
cent, there has been a signiﬁ  cant increase in shareholder value. On the 
world’s stock markets, shareholder value is measured by dividends and 
increases in the company’s share price. If you buy a share at $40, and in 
the course of the year the share rises in price to $50, and you receive a 
dividend of $5, there has been a $15 increase in shareholder value. 

===== PAGE 369 =====
 
346 Customer Relationship Management
   Peter Doyle points out that managers are agents whose task is to act 
in the interests of the principals, the shareholders with ﬁ  nancial rights 
over the business. Managers, he suggests, have a primary responsibility 
to maximize shareholder value over time.  1
   What, then, is the link between CRM and shareholder value? The 
value of a business is the present day value of all margins that will be 
earned from sales to customers in the future. In earlier chapters, we 
have discussed the idea of customer lifetime value (LTV). The value of a 
business is equal to the LTV generated by its customers. CRM, therefore, 
can have a huge impact on shareholder value. It does so by creating and 
retaining proﬁ table relationships with customers. A number of speciﬁ  c 
CRM competences inﬂ uence shareholder value: 
    1 .       Target market selection  : target markets vary in their attractiveness. 
Where demand is falling or static, or there is intense competition, 
margins come under pressure, with negative consequences for 
shareholder value. Shareholders prefer markets that show signs of 
both margin and market growth.  
    2 .       Customer acquisition  : effective and efﬁ  cient customer acquisition 
reduces the costs of acquisition, but grows the numbers of new 
customers acquired.  
    3 .       Customer retention : focused and effective customer retention means 
that strategically-signiﬁ cant customers are retained, as is their lifetime 
value.
    4 .       Customer development : effective cross-selling and up-selling grows 
share of wallet and the value of retained customers.  
    5 .       Value proposition development : a key component of strategic CRM 
is the development of value propositions that customers prefer over 
competitors and want to buy.  
    6 .       Technology implementation  : CRM systems enable companies to 
manage the customer lifecycle more effectively and efﬁ  ciently. Sales-
force automation ensures that opportunities are identiﬁ  ed, tracked 
and moved to closure. Marketing automation ensures that campaigns 
and events are more effective. Service automation ensures that 
customers ’  service requirements are satisﬁ ed cost-effectively. 
    7 .       Database management  : customer-related data is an important 
intangible asset that can be exploited to grow customer value and 
therefore shareholder value. CRM applications need appropriately 
high-quality data to be effective.  
    8 .       Network management  : successful companies are excellent at 
identifying and building relationships with partners who can help 
create and deliver customer value.  
        Shareholder value, as delivered by CRM expertise, works as shown in 
 Figure 12.1   . The basic CRM disciplines of managing the value of current 
and new customers are shown to the left and centre of the diagram. At 
the right is a third source of growth that can power shareholder value: 
the creation of new businesses. 
  The two fundamental approaches to growing shareholder value through 
current customers are to sell more and/or reduce the cost-to-serve. Unless 

===== PAGE 370 =====
 
Managing investor and employee relationships 347
there is a massive re-engineering of sales and service channels (e.g. moving 
from a branch network to an online presence), cost containment is unlikely 
to add signiﬁ  cantly to shareholder value. Revenue generation through 
current customers offers greater potential. There are three core strategies: 
increase customer retention rate, grow share of category spending (share 
of wallet) by up-selling or cross-selling, and introduce new product 
categories to current customers. New customer acquisition offers another 
route for revenue growth. Customers can be new in two senses: either 
they are new to the category or they are new to the company, having 
been won from competitors. The third CRM-related strategy for growing 
shareholder value is to develop new businesses – either by growing them 
organically, by forming alliances with other organizations or by acquiring 
new businesses. 
  As already noted, investors and owners expect to experience 
enhanced shareholder value though dividend receipts or rising share 
price. Generally, Western investors, whether institutional or individual, 
take a rather short-term view of their investments. They expect to see a 
speedy, if not immediate, return. This short-termism is responsible for 
hot investment money racing from one money-making opportunity to 
another. 
  The period of time that it can take for CRM to show a return on 
investment varies according to the type of CRM that is being implemented. 
  A strategic CRM implementation demands investments in technology, 
processes and people. These projects often involve major changes in 
corporate culture and restructuring of the business around customer 
groups, and may take three to ﬁ ve years to return a proﬁ t. Even then, the 
evidence of a return may differ from the ﬁ  nancial indicators normally 
preferred by investors. Success at strategic CRM may be reﬂ  ected in 
higher levels of customer satisfaction and customer retention or in a 
greater share of customer spend. You might also ﬁ  nd that employees ’
Current customers New businesses
Revenue
generation
Cost
containment
New customers
New-to-
category
Organic
growth Alliances AcquisitionNew-to-
company
Improve
retention rate
Grow share-
of-wallet
Sell new
categories
Up-sell
Cross-sell
Shareholder value
 Figure 12.1 
      Shareholder value 
through CRM    

===== PAGE 371 =====
 
348 Customer Relationship Management
attitudes to customers have changed, or that the business acquires, 
shares and uses customer information more intelligently. 
   Over a three to ﬁ ve year term it may be impossible to prove that any 
shift in sales or proﬁ t is due to CRM or, for that matter, any other type of 
programme. Business performance is inﬂ  uenced by many conditions, a 
large number of which are beyond the control of any single enterprise, 
for example, business cycles, exchange rates, international relations, 
government regulations, competitor action and technological advances. 
Changes in these conditions over a three to ﬁ  ve year term may serve to 
promote, counterbalance or reduce the impact of a CRM programme. 
  An operational CRM project, such as sales-force automation, might 
yield a return within 12 to 24 months. Computer infrastructure and 
software has to be installed, the selling process modelled, and current 
data transferred onto the new system. Then salespeople need to be 
trained to work the new system. The returns on such an investment 
might include higher levels of salesperson productivity, such as calls 
made, proposals written or enquiries handled. An operational CRM 
project for 3Com, the company behind Palm handheld computers, 
involved shifting customer service from call centre to web self-service. 
3Com enjoyed $16.8 million savings over a two year period as fewer calls 
entered the call centre, talk times fell, call transfers fell and training costs 
fell. It is not reported whether customer satisfaction was inﬂ uenced. 
  An analytical CRM implementation can show results almost 
immediately, as long as the right type of customer-related data is 
available to be able to run campaigns. Even a more complex project, in 
which internal data from several databases is integrated and enhanced 
with bought-in data, can show a return within a year. However, if a 
data warehouse needs to be created from scratch, the time-to-return 
can be much lengthier.  Figure 12.2    shows how a UK-based business-to-
business catalogue company used CRM analytics to target more precisely 
prospects for a particular mailing. The company ran an experiment in 
which their conventional approach to direct marketing was contrasted 
with a CRM-enabled approach. The numbers show that under the CRM 
Number of catalogues mailed 1000 5000
Mailing cost £3,000 £15,000
New customers obtained 2003 65 45
Conversion rate new customers 6.5% 0.09%
Initial sales per new customer £180 £120
Total new initial sales revenues £11,700 £5,400
Acquisition cost per customer £46.15 £333.33
Average customer sales 2003–2006 £7,500 £2,200
2 year gross margin (40%) £3,000 £880
2003 customers still active in 2006 80% 35%
TraditionalCRM
 Figure 12.2 
      Analytical CRM at 
Business Direct    

===== PAGE 372 =====
 
Managing investor and employee relationships 349
approach fewer catalogues were mailed, conversion rates and initial sales 
per new customer were higher, customer acquisition costs were lower 
and two-year sales and margins were higher. 
  It is possible to conduct many such experiments on subsets of 
customers, to generate evidence that there is a return on CRM investment. 
You can prove CRMs value by reference to speciﬁ c data, such as customer 
acquisition costs, sales per customer, customer retention rates and 
customer tenure. 
  A collaborative CRM project might take two or more years to 
reap beneﬁ ts. A manufacturer that wants to introduce portal-based 
self-service to its customers faces the challenge of raising customer 
enthusiasm for the change. There might be signiﬁ cant levels of resistance 
from customers who prefer the current service model, whether that 
is face-to-face sales representation or telesales. Collaborative CRM 
implementations align the people, processes and/or technologies of two 
or more organizations and therefore have the potential for major delays. 
   Fred Reichheld claims that  ‘ just as there are customers and employees 
who are right for your business there are investors who are right ’ .
2   The 
typical investor, focused on the short-term, is not the right investor for 
companies that are in pursuit of high levels of customer retention, which 
generates long-term increases in shareholder value. He suggests that 
even if you are a publicly-owned company you can pursue one or more 
of four ways to create a stable group of long-term oriented investors: 
educate current investors; shift the investor mix to institutions that 
avoid investor churn; attract the right kind of core owner and operate as 
a privately owned company.  
    Educate current investors 
   Investors are justiﬁ ably sceptical of new business models. In recent 
years they have been promised improved proﬁ  tability from BPR, 
ERP and TQM (business process re-engineering, enterprise resource 
planning and total quality management). Many investors have been 
disappointed. Why should their response be any different to another 
three letter acronym, CRM, particularly when various reports suggest 
that upwards of 60 per cent, and perhaps as many as 90 per cent, of CRM 
implementations have failed?  
3
   Investors need to understand that CRM, well implemented, does 
have an inﬂ  uence on shareholder value. Many vendors provide case 
illustrations for cautious or sceptical investors. One notable success story 
is the Royal Bank of Canada (RBC), which won the ﬁ  rst international 
award for CRM excellence in large corporations. RBC started their CRM 
initiative in 1995. They have invested well over $100 million in their 
transition to being a CRM-driven company. The bank’s vice president 
for CRM claims: 
  ‘ we no longer view CRM as a programme  …  (It) is our core strategy. 
We absolutely conclude that CRM is paying us back in spades. It has 

===== PAGE 373 =====
 
350 Customer Relationship Management
enabled us to grow both top of the house revenue line and at the 
same time achieve huge cost savings ’ .
   Revenue growth is running at 10–15 per cent per annum and proﬁ  t 
growth at 25 per cent. 
   Investors need to understand that CRM, when well implemented, 
inﬂ uences both sides of the proﬁ  t equation: costs and revenues. CRM 
is very much about recruiting and retaining the right customers. These 
are customers who generate long-term value for the business. The 
long term may be several years, particularly if the repurchase cycle is 
extended. General Motors reckons its customers are worth $276 000 over 
a lifetime of being GM customers, during which time they purchase 11 
GM vehicles.  
4
   Finally, investors need to understand that CRM yields long-term 
beneﬁ ts. There may be short-term results, but the true beneﬁ  ts may take 
years to deliver. Failure at CRM is indeed still an option  …  but it is not a 
requirement. 
    Shift the investor mix towards institutions that 
avoid investment churn 
   Most investors routinely churn their portfolios in search of a better 
return. However, some institutions are more stable investors than others, 
preferring to buy and hold for the long-term. Low churn investing 
appeals to a limited number of investment houses. Once you have 
identiﬁ ed them, it is suggested that you market your stock to them in 
much the same way as you market your products and service to your 
customers. This means segmenting the institutional investor market, 
targeting particular investors and positioning your stock against other 
stocks competing for the buying power of those chosen investors. Nike 
is one company that has pursued this strategy in order to maintain a 
stable shareholder base. 
    Attract the right kind of core owner 
   This approach is based on ﬁ nding an institutional or individual investor 
who understands your CRM goals and is prepared to take a controlling 
position, and be patient for the long-term beneﬁ  ts. Reichheld cites 
Warren Buffett as the archetypal controlling investor. Buffett runs the 
investment company Berkshire Hathaway, where portfolio turnover is 
below 10 per cent. He has bought stock in very few companies over the 
last twenty years, and has remained loyal to those companies. He looks 
for companies that show high return on equity, a strong customer base, a 
simple business idea and an undervalued market position. Buffett is not 
the only investor taking the long view. Japanese and German investors 
typically take a much longer term view of their investments than most 
of their Western counterparts.  

===== PAGE 374 =====
 
Managing investor and employee relationships 351
    Go private 
   Companies that are privately owned do not need to dance to the tune 
of the stock market. They can take a long-term view of investments 
in customer management. However, private ownership is not for 
everybody. The level of debt that is needed to fund a CRM-based 
approach to business development can be very high. In fact it may be 
too high a risk for most private business owners to bear. 
   The entrepreneur Richard Branson ﬂ oated the Virgin Group on the 
London stock market in 1986. By October 1988 he had bought back all 
the distributed shares, at huge personal cost. He had been unable to run 
the businesses under the Virgin umbrella in the way he wanted. His 
entrepreneurial approach to management, he felt, was incompatible with 
the institutional demands for immediate returns on investment. The 
institutions would not have tolerated the results achieved by his airline, 
Virgin Atlantic. Established in 1984, it was in only 1995 that the airline 
showed a return on capital employed that would have been positive 
enough to please an institutional investor, 27 per cent. Just three years 
previously, the airline recorded a negative 29.7 per cent return. Branson 
was able to keep to his strategy of ‘ happy employees      /H11001      customer value      /H11005      
business performance ’ .
    Investor relations portals 
   Just as web technologies have allowed customers, suppliers and channel 
partners to operate as an extension of an organization’s CRM system, 
so too have investor portals led to unprecedented levels of access for 
investors (see Figure 12.3    for an example of an investor portal). Many 
organizations today operate an investor website, allowing access to 
important information, such as company overviews, mission and vision, 
strategy, ﬁ nancial reports, publications and presentations, statutory 
ﬁ lings, analyst views and market assessments. Investors are able to 
register with the website, request information, sign up for mailing lists 
and provide feedback. Sometimes the website offers search engine 
enabled access to an investor-relevant knowledge base.  
    Employees 
   It is hard to overestimate the importance of people to the success of 
CRM. People design and implement the CRM strategy, they use CRM 
software to help them run campaigns and events, and to sell to and 
service customers. Further, basic human skills such as showing empathy 
and responding are vital to delivering excellent experience in interaction 
with customers. 

===== PAGE 375 =====
 
352 Customer Relationship Management
   Many companies intuitively recognize the importance of their people 
in creating value for customers and company alike. Some explicitly 
acknowledge the importance of people. The PepsiCo 2006 annual report, 
for example, says:
 Our people represent PepsiCo’s ultimate competitive advantage  …
Our  ‘ ownership culture ’  empowers our associates. We are a 
big company that thinks like a small enterprise. Our associates 
fundamentally see their jobs as ﬁ nding solutions for customers and 
consumers and doing what it takes to exceed their expectations.  5
   Companies need to be able to identify, recruit, develop and retain high-
quality employees who can contribute effectively to the achievement of 
the company’s CRM goals. Employee turnover is a huge cost in some 
industries. In food service, for example, frontline staff can turnover at 
200 per cent or more each year. Turnover in senior positions can also be 
high. Nearly 20 per cent of managing directors change position each year. 
When an employee departs companies incur the direct costs of replacing 
that person: search costs, interviewing costs, relocation costs and so on. 
There may also be indirect costs, such as business lost when customer 
accounts are not properly serviced. In extreme cases, employees may 
take customers with them when they depart. This is common in the 
advertising industry. When creative staff leaves an established agency to 
set up on their own, they very often take clients with them. 
 Figure 12.3 
      General Electric’s 
investor portal    

===== PAGE 376 =====
 
Managing investor and employee relationships 353
  Companies need to deﬁ ne the competencies that are needed to work 
successfully in deﬁ ned CRM roles. Employees who are responsible for 
managing an important strategic alliance will need different competencies 
from employees working on the analysis of customer data using data 
mining tools. They in turn will need different competencies from those 
who work in the frontline, interfacing with customers, perhaps in a call 
centre. We review some important CRM roles in Chapter 17. 
  Whatever their role, it is important that employees buy into the 
CRM mission and vision, understand their role, and appreciate what 
the company is trying to achieve in its served markets. The importance 
of obtaining employee buy-in to the CRM vision was emphasized in 
Chapter 3. It is often necessary to market the CRM project’s vision, 
strategy and objectives to employees to achieve initial buy-in and 
ongoing commitment. This deployment of marketing strategies and 
tactics to the workforce is known as internal marketing. 
    Internal marketing 
  The concept of internal marketing has been in existence since the 1980s, 
when Len Berry suggested that it made sense to apply marketing-like 
strategies to people management. 6   Winning and keeping good employees 
was thought to be much like winning and keeping good customers. 
Furthermore, to win employees ’  commitment to your CRM strategy, you 
were advised to market that strategy to them as if it were a product they 
were expected to buy. Internal marketing can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 Internal marketing is a planned effort to overcome organizational 
resistance to change and to align, motivate and integrate employees 
towards the effective implementation of corporate and functional 
strategies.
7
   There isn’t much evidence of companies writing internal marketing 
plans along the same lines as their external marketing plans, but it 
is possible to employ the same architecture to think in a structured 
way about how you would win your colleagues ’  commitment to your 
CRM strategy. Most marketing plans address a number of core issues: 
marketing objectives, market segmentation and targeting, market 
positioning and marketing mix. We’ll explain each of these brieﬂ  y in the 
context of internal marketing of your CRM strategy. 
●       Marketing objectives  : these might include broad qualitative goals, 
such as winning commitment to the CRM strategy, motivating 
employees to adopt new work practices or developing a culture in 
which the customer’s voice is central. Equally, objectives might be 
readily quantiﬁ able, for example, training 100 per cent of employees 
to understand the concept of customer lifetime value.  
●       Market segmentation and targeting  : segmentation involves dividing 
the internal market into homogenous subsets so that you can target 
each group with a different marketing mix. You might, for example, 

===== PAGE 377 =====
 
354 Customer Relationship Management
segment by the employee’s degree of customer contact. 8   This has been 
done by a European Train Operating company, as shown in Figure 
12.4. They identiﬁ  ed four segments of employees, varying in levels 
of customer contact and therefore with varying levels of inﬂ  uence on 
customer experience.  
Rail companySegment
1. Contactors: employees who have direct frequent or Ticket office, station
 periodic customer contact; managers, guards
2. Modifiers: employees who have less direct frequent Drivers, telephone sales 
  or periodic customer contact which is usually not face to face;
3. Influencers: employees who traditionally have no Senior executives 
 direct contact with the customers although they may
 make many decisions in relation to customers; 
4. Isolateds:  employees who have no customer contact at all.   Finance 
 Figure 12.4 
      Segmenting the 
internal market by 
level of customer 
contact    
●       Market positioning  : positioning is concerned with how you want 
CRM to be perceived by each internal market segment. For senior 
management it may make sense to position it as a sound strategic 
move that will make their shareholdings more valuable, for others 
the positioning may be about job enrichment, work satisfaction, 
process simpliﬁ cation or anything else that the segment values. One 
positioning will not suit all segments.  
●       Marketing mix : the marketing mix is the set of tools that marketers 
use to bring about the results they want in their target markets.  Figure 
12.5    shows how the 7Ps of the marketing mix, ﬁ  rst introduced in 
Chapter 7, can be used for internal marketing purposes. Key elements 
in the internal marketing mix are communication and networking.  9
    Empowerment 
   Many strategic CRM implementations make a virtue of creating a culture 
and climate in which the customer’s voice is heard, valued and acted 
upon. Consequently, they give their customer contact staff a higher level 
of authority to meet, and even exceed, customer requirements. Some 
companies make heroes out of employees who have  ‘ gone the extra 
mile ’ . However, empowerment is not just a matter of telling employees 
they are now responsible for managing the customer relationship. 
Empowerment means equipping employees with the knowledge and 
skills to match that authority. For example, they need to know how to 

===== PAGE 378 =====
 
Managing investor and employee relationships 355
deal constructively with a customer complaint, particularly one that 
is objectively unjustiﬁ  ed. This may involve scripting the dialogue in 
advance, providing information from a knowledge database on known 
problems and how they can be resolved, or providing diagnostics tools. 
   Empowerment ranges from total authority to do what it takes to 
satisfy and retain a customer, to bounded empowerment where the 
employee has more limited discretion to act. The boundaries may be 
ﬁ nancial (e.g. no more than $200 per customer) or product related (e.g. 
domestic appliances but not ﬁ nancial services). 
  Empowerment helps create an environment in which employees feel 
trusted and valued, leading to greater job satisfaction and motivation, 
which in turn can improve customer satisfaction and retention.  
10   However, 
empowerment is not always an appropriate strategy. Michael Treacey and 
Fred Wiersema found that successful companies excelled at one of three 
basic value-delivery disciplines: operational excellence, product leadership 
and customer intimacy.  11   These are discussed in more detail in Chapter 7. 
The role of empowerment must be limited in businesses founded on 
operational excellence. Too much empowerment might slow down and 
impede the operational processes that create excellence. Empowerment is 
much better suited to organizations dedicated to customer intimacy. 
    The service–proﬁ t chain 
  In the section above, you read about the link between satisﬁ ed employees 
and satisﬁ ed customers. Many companies believe that happy employees 
make happy customers make happy shareholders. Among them are 
Product
– Employees ‘buy’ the CRM strategies they must implement, changed work
 processes or other related initiatives of senior management
Price
– Psychological cost of adopting new work practices
Promotion (internal communications)
– Face-to-face briefings, corporate newspapers, employee portals, corporate
 videos, trial runs (c.f. sampling), incentive plans, corporate TV network (e.g.
 FedEx), road-shows, conferences  
Place
– On-site/off-site meetings, virtual locations
Physical evidence
– Memos, briefing notes, training manuals, job descriptions
Process
– Training, coaching, direction, negotiation
Participants
– Colleagues, team-members, supervisors, CEO, trainers, consultants
 Figure 12.5 
      Using 7Ps as the 
internal marketing 
mix    

===== PAGE 379 =====
 
356 Customer Relationship Management
Marriott Hotels, Virgin Airline, Westpac Bank (see  Figure 12.6   ), Taylor 
Nelson SOFRES (a market research company), Sears Roebuck and Volvo. 
They believe that if employees are satisﬁ  ed at work they will deliver 
excellent experience to their internal and external customers. This in turn 
will drive up customer retention rates and improve business performance. 
   The connections between business performance, customer satisfaction 
and employee satisfaction were ﬁ rst spelt out in the service–proﬁ  t chain, 
a model developed by a group of Harvard professors.  12
  As originally speciﬁ ed, the model suggests linkages between internal 
service quality (the quality of service we receive from our colleagues in the 
workplace), employee satisfaction, value delivered to customers, external 
customer satisfaction, customer loyalty and business performance. 
The model does not claim cause and effect relationships between these 
variables. It simply ﬁ  nds evidence of correlation. Businesses like AC 
Nielsen, the international market research company, for example, ﬁ nd the 
model very attractive. It provides them with an organizing framework for 
running their business. They claim: 
  ‘ We live and breathe the service–proﬁ  t chain, understanding our 
customers are fundamental to our success – satisﬁ  ed employees 
make satisﬁ ed clients, make happy shareholders ’ .  
13
  There is some evidence to support this claim. Some is generated by 
practitioners and consultants, some by academics. 14   Ben Schneider and 
David Bowen have found that a climate for service and a climate for 
employee wellbeing are highly correlated with customer perceptions of 
service quality. Put another way, the experiences that employees have at 
work are associated with the experiences of customers. Sears Roebuck, the 
retailer, has found a high inverse correlation between customer satisfaction 
Internal
service
quality
Employee
commitment
Employee
retention
Employee
productivity
Superior
customer
experience
Customer
satisfaction
Customer
loyalty
Revenue
growth
Profitability
Shareholder
value
Service profit chain
Employee Customer Shareholder
 Figure 12.6        The service–proﬁ t chain at Westpac Bank    

===== PAGE 380 =====
 
Managing investor and employee relationships 357
and employee turnover. The stores with highest employee turnover had 
the lowest customer satisfaction, and vice versa. The research also found 
that increases in employee attitude correlated strongly with increases in 
both customer satisfaction and revenue growth. 
15
   Sears has developed a measurement model linking employee 
experience to customer experience to business performance. They call 
this the TPI (Total Performance Indicators) model. They report: 
  ‘ We use the TPI at every level of the company, in every store and 
facility; and nearly every manager has some portion of his or her 
compensation at risk on the basis of non-ﬁ  nancial measures  …  (I)n 
the course of the last 12 months, employee satisfaction on the Sears 
TPI has risen by almost 4 per cent and customer satisfaction by 
4 per cent …  if our model is correct – and its predictive record is 
very good – that 4 per cent improvement in customer satisfaction 
translates into more than $200 million in additional revenues in the 
past 12 months ’ .
   Elsewhere, research on the linkages between components in the service–
proﬁ t chain has met with mixed results. For example, one grocery 
retailing study found no correlation between employee satisfaction and 
customer satisfaction, and worryingly reported a negative correlation 
between employee satisfaction and proﬁ  t margin!  
16   Other banking 
industry research concluded:  ‘ Branches with favourable employee 
attitude and climate scores have elevated levels of customer satisfaction 
and sales achievement, and branches with higher levels of customer 
satisfaction also have stronger sales ’ . However, the effect was small 
and barely signiﬁ cant.  
17   Another study by the Institute of Employment 
Studies found that employee commitment was connected to company 
proﬁ tability in three ways: 
    1.     directly through employee behaviours  
    2.     indirectly through customer satisfaction 
    3.     indirectly through a reduction in staff absenteeism and turnover.  
18
  Although research continues, the service–proﬁ t chain is proving to be a 
useful framework for many businesses.  
    Employee relationship 
management (ERM) 
software applications 
  A number of leading CRM application vendors also offer employee 
relationship management (ERM) modules. Other terms for ERM are 
human capital management and talent management. ERM involves the 
application of CRM-like concepts, processes, tools and technologies to 

===== PAGE 381 =====
 
358 Customer Relationship Management
the internal market, i.e. the workforce. An Oracle white paper describes 
ERM as follows. 
 Employee relationship management (ERM) provides applications, 
content and services that enhance the value of the employee to the 
organization and directly affect the activities by which employees 
create value for the customer. Companies today are realizing that, 
just as they need a single, comprehensive view of their customers 
(such as that provided by customer relationship management 
(CRM) solutions) they would also beneﬁ t from having a single view 
of their employees and from providing that view to the employees 
themselves.
19
   Just as CRM strives to build long-term relationships with valued 
customers, ERM strives to build long-term relationships with valued 
employees. ERMs two main internal user groups are employees and 
managers. Managers can use ERM to help them with a number of people 
management tasks: recruitment, training, performance management and 
remuneration, for example. ERM enables managers to communicate 
with their teams, align employees with the overall goals of the business, 
share information and build a common understanding. ERM also offers 
support to employees through workﬂ  ow modelling that depicts how 
tasks should be performed, provision of job-related information and 
collaboration with colleagues. 
  A key technology for many ERM applications is the employee 
portal. Employee portals are one stop shops that provide access to all 
the role-relevant resources employees need to do their jobs effectively 
and efﬁ ciently, whether they are managers or reports. As with many 
commercial websites, portals often allow employees to customize their 
own homepage so that role relevant information is readily accessible. 
See Case 12.1.  
20
       Case 12.1   
  ERM in the US Navy      
   Traditionally, the US Navy’s sailors have been motivated by the desire to serve their country 
and have a rewarding career. Nevertheless, the military is always concerned with sailor 
morale, due in part to the unique circumstances of its  ‘ employees ’  being separated from 
their families for extended periods of time. The happier the Navy can keep its sailors, the 
more effective it believes they will be and the less likely they are to quit for civilian life. 
As the complexity and technical nature of military equipment has increased, the return on 
the investment of recruiting and training qualiﬁ  ed sailors has become more critical. This 
translates directly into the issue of sailor retention. For the Navy to spend large amounts 
of time and money to recruit and train sailors for increasingly technical jobs, only to watch 
them leave the military for the civilian sector after a few years, is clearly counterproductive, 
very expensive, and a serious issue in terms of military readiness. The US Navy has 

===== PAGE 382 =====
 
Managing investor and employee relationships 359
therefore embarked on building a relationship with its sailors that fosters improved morale, 
maximizes job satisfaction, and promotes sailor retention. 
   One part of the solution has been to use technology to create sailor-speciﬁ  c, personalized, 
web pages on a Navy Internet portal. This was expected to create an environment in which 
each sailor felt that the Navy knew and cared about him or her personally. Researchers 
investigated what kinds of personalized communications would be of interest to sailors. Top 
of the list of preferences, as shown in the inset table were family communications, such as 
e-mails and birthday reminders, and general interest information, such as hometown news, 
favorite sports teams ’  scores and quotes of particular stocks. 
   Family communications  1.76 
   General interest information  3.17 
   Career and training information  3.25 
   Job-related information  3.95 
   Health and ﬁ  tness information  4.58 
   Military news  5.12 
   Shipmate news  6.16 
  ( 1       /H11005      high preference; 7      /H11005      low preference)  
         Sailor preferences for personalized communications  
        Summary      
   In this chapter you have learned about the importance of managing relationships with 
owners/investors and employees. Owners and investors are an important source of 
capital, in return for which they expect growth in shareholder value. Any expectations 
that they will enjoy a fast return on their investment in CRM may need to be moderated 
because strategic CRM implementations may not earn a return for between three and 
ﬁ ve years, and operational CRM might have a payback horizon of one to two years. 
Companies that have high levels of investor churn because of dissatisfaction with 
returns on CRM investment can pursue one or more of four ways to create a stable 
group of long-term oriented investors: educate current investors, shift the investor 
mix to institutions that avoid investor churn, attract the right kind of core owner and 
operate as a privately owned company. 

===== PAGE 383 =====
 
360 Customer Relationship Management
  References  
       1.          Doyle ,    P .             ( 2000 )        Value-based marketing: marketing strategies for corporate 
growth and shareholder value             .  Chichester :       John Wiley              .  
       2.          Reichheld ,    F.F.   and   Teal ,    T.             ( 1996 )        The loyalty effect: the hidden force 
behind growth, proﬁ ts, and lasting value             .  Boston, MA :      Harvard Business 
School Press              .   
       3.         Ang, L., Buttle, F., (2002) ROI on CRM: a customer journey approach, 
ANZMAC Annual Conference, Melbourne      
       4.          Ferron ,    J.             ( 2000 )       The customer-centric organization in the automobile 
industry: focus for the 21st century .        In:       S.     Brown  (ed.)       .      Customer
Relationship Management. A strategic imperative in the world of 
e-business          .  Toronto :       John Wiley      , pp.  189  –       211        .  
       5.          http://www.pepsico.com/PEP_Investors/AnnualReports/06/
PepsiCo2006Annual.pdf . Accessed 18 November 2007. 
       6.          Berry ,    L.L.                ( 1981 )        The employee as customer .            Journal of Retail Banking       ,  
Vol.  3 March         , pp.  25  –       28        .  
       7.          Ahmed ,    P .    K. and Raﬁ q ,    M.             ( 2002 )        Internal Marketing: tools and concepts 
for customer-focussed management             .  Oxford :       Butterworth Heinemann              .  
       8.          Judd ,    V .C.                ( 1987 )        Differentiate with the 5th P: People .Industrial
Marketing Management       , Vol.  16         , pp.  241  –       247        .  
       9.          Gilmore ,    A.   and   Carson ,    D.             ( 1995 )       Internal marketing: the missing 
half of the marketing programme .        In:       W.J.     Glynn   and   J.G.     Barnes  
(eds.)       .      Understanding services management          .  Chichester :       John Wiley              .  
      10.          Bowen ,    D.E.   and   Lawler ,    E.E.                ( 1992 )        The empowerment of service 
workers: what, why, how and when .            Sloan Management Review        ,   
 Spring         , pp.  31  –       39        .  
   Employees are critical to the successful deployment of CRM. People design and 
implement the CRM strategy. They use technology tactically. Many companies recognize 
the importance of their people in creating value for customers and company alike. 
It is often necessary to market the CRM project’s vision, strategy and objectives to 
employees to achieve initial buy-in and ongoing commitment. This deployment of 
marketing strategies and tactics to the workforce is known as internal marketing. 
   A growing number of companies give their customer contact the authority to meet, 
and even exceed, customer requirements. This is known as empowerment, and it 
involves equipping employees with the knowledge and skills to match the authority. 
   Many companies, particularly in the service sector, believe that employee 
satisfaction is a necessary precondition for customer satisfaction and excellent business 
performance. They believe that if employees are satisﬁ  ed at work, they will deliver 
excellent experience to their internal and external customers. This in turn will drive 
up customer retention rates and improve business performance. These connections 
between business performance, customer satisfaction and employee satisfaction are 
spelt out in the service–proﬁ  t chain.       

===== PAGE 384 =====
 
Managing investor and employee relationships 361
      11.          Treacey ,    M.   and   Wiersema ,    F.             ( 1995 )        The discipline of market leaders: 
choose your customers, narrow your focus, dominate your market             .  
 Reading, MA :       Addison-Wesley              .  
      12.         Heskett, J.L., Jones, T.O., Loveman, G.W. Sasser, W.E. Jr and 
Schlesinger, L.A. (1994) Putting the service–proﬁ  t chain to work. 
Harvard Business Review , March–April, pp. 164–174; Rucci, A., Kirn, 
S.P . and Quinn R.T. (1998) The employee–customer proﬁ  t chain 
at Sears. Harvard Business Review , January–February, pp. 82–97; 
Loveman, G.W. (1998) Employee satisfaction, customer loyalty and 
ﬁ nancial performance. Journal of Service Research , Vol. 1, August, 
pp. 18–31. 
      13.         For more details refer to  http://www.acnielsen.com.au/       
      14.         Dennis McCarthy’s 1997 book The loyalty link: how loyal employees 
create loyal customers  (New York: John Wiley) is an example of the 
consultant’s approach. He writes  ‘ the abstract nature of these terms 
(customer loyalty and employee loyalty) makes it difﬁ  cult to prove 
empirically that such a link exists, but there is a preponderance of 
indirect evidence ’ . He then cites many examples of associations 
between employee satisfaction, employee retention and customer 
loyalty.      
      15.          Rucci ,    A.  ,   Kirn ,    S.P .   and   Quinn ,    R.T.                ( 1998 )        The employee–customer 
proﬁ t chain at Sears . Harvard Business Review       ,  January–February         , pp. 
 8 2   –        9 7         .   
      16.          Silvestro ,    R.   and   Cross ,    S.                ( 2000 )        Applying the service–proﬁ t chain 
in a retail environment .            International Journal of Service Industry 
Management       , Vol.  11      ( 3 )       , pp.  244  –       268        .  
      17.          Geladel ,    G.A.   and   Young ,    S.                ( 2005 )        Test of a service proﬁ t chain 
model in the retail banking sector .            Journal of Occupational and 
Organizational Psychology       , Vol.  78         , pp.  1  –       22        .  
      18.         Barber, L., Hayday, S. and Bevan, S. (1999) From people to proﬁ ts. 
Institute of Employment Studies Report 355. 
      19.         Linking Employee Relationship Management to Customer 
Relationship Management. Oracle White Paper, 2006.  http://www.
oracle.com/applications/crm/siebel/resources/erm-white-paper.
pdf . Accessed 18 November 2007. 
      20.          Gillensen ,    M.L.   and   Sanders ,    T.C.                ( 2005 )        Employee relationship 
management: applying the concept of personalization to US Navy 
sailors .            Information Systems Management       ,  Winter         , pp.  45  –       50        .        

===== PAGE 385 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 386 =====
 
                                Information technology 
for customer relationship 
management  
 Chapter 13 

===== PAGE 387 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 388 =====
 
           Chapter objectives      
   By the end of this chapter you will understand: 
    1.   the range of CRM technologies  
    2.   the role that technology plays in the achievement of CRM outcomes  
    3.   the structure of the CRM ecosystem  
    4.   the main application areas of CRM  
    5.   the role that analytics play in CRM technology  
    6.   the importance of integration, knowledge management and workﬂ  ow to CRM 
outcomes.         
    Introduction 
   Our deﬁ nition of CRM stresses that CRM is a technology-enabled 
approach to management of the customer interface. In this chapter we 
present an introduction to CRM technologies. 1   Subsequent chapters take 
a more detailed look at sales-force automation, marketing automation 
and service automation.  
    Origins of CRM technology 
   The building blocks of today’s CRM technology have been in place 
for several decades. CRM has evolved from a range of standalone 
technologies including call centres, sales-force automation systems and 
customer information ﬁ les (CIF), some of which date back to the 1970s 
and earlier. 
   In the late 1980s, several organizations attempted to consolidate some 
of these disparate technologies. For example, the CIF that was central 
to many insurance companies and banks started to be seen as a source 
of marketing information, rather than a basic record of a customer’s 
accounts. Call centres began being used for outbound calls such as 
up-selling customers rather than just responding to inbound service 
calls. The customer started to be recognized as a single entity across all 
customer-facing departments, leading to the idea of a  ‘ single view of the 
customer ’  ( Figure 13.1   ), whereby appropriate customer-related data is 
made available at all customer touchpoints and channels. 
   Customer expectations have also played a direct role in the emergence 
of CRM technology. As customers moved from one industry to the next 
they took their increased expectations with them.  ‘ I am recognized 
by my airline ’ , they’d say.  ‘ So I expect to be recognized by my energy 

===== PAGE 389 =====
 
366 Customer Relationship Management
utility ’ . CRM spread rapidly from the early adopter industries, such 
as banks and telecommunications companies, to consumer goods and 
healthcare. Organizations started to realize that they needed a central 
view of the customer, and an understanding of the value of the customer, 
if they were to compete effectively. 
   These early attempts at the creation of a consolidated customer view 
were often internally-focused, rather than aimed at improving customer 
experience. The ultimate goal became multichannel CRM, whereby 
customer contact channels such as sales, channel partners, marketing 
and the service centre were consolidated into a single view of the 
customer, across all touchpoints and communication media including 
face-to-face, voice telephony, e-mail, web and wireless ( Figure 13.2   ). 
Customers, after all, expect a continuous, consistent dialogue with a 
company, irrespective of the systems and departments within. This is the 
idea of a  ‘ single view for the customer ’  ( Figure 13.3   ). 
   Multichannel CRM presents a signiﬁ  cant technical challenge. The 
technology required to support remote ﬁ eld salespeople is very different 
to the technology required to support a large, high-volume call centre. 
This technical challenge made it difﬁ cult to provide technology support 
for all of the customer channels in one system. 
   The emphasis on obtaining a single view of the customer is dependent 
on the effective deployment of operational CRM. Recently, the emphasis 
has moved toward understanding the value of the customer, and 
increasing the value of each interaction with the customer. This requires 
Billing
system
Accounting
system
Inventory
system
Front-office users:
Salesperson
(mobile wireless)
Marketing
(telemarketing)
Service engineer
(mobile synchronized)
Management
(decision support)
Partner
(team selling)
Customer
(Self service)
Customer
file
Single view of customer?
Product
file
Call
history
Service
records
Sales
notes
 Figure 13.1 
      A single view of the 
customer for front-
ofﬁ ce applications    

===== PAGE 390 =====
 
Marketing
Sales
Service
Warehouse
Finance
Customer
Channel
Partner
 Figure 13.2        The challenge of multiple different channels of communication between an 
organization, its partners and its customers  2      
Channel
partner
Marketing
Sales
Service
Warehouse
Finance
Customer
 Figure 13.3        The customer expectation – consolidation of channels into a single, consistent 
dialogue  3      

===== PAGE 391 =====
 
368 Customer Relationship Management
sophisticated analytical tools, leading to the recent focus on analytical, 
rather than operational CRM. 
  Web technologies also had a signiﬁ cant role to play in the emergence 
of a broader conception of CRM, encompassing users other than direct 
employees (customers, channel partners, investors). Web browsers 
( Figure 13.4   ) allowed these external users to access and share information, 
without requiring specialist software to be installed on their own 
computers, leading to extra-enterprise CRM functions such as customer 
self-service, partner portals and investor portals. 
 Figure 13.4        Microsoft CRM web browser interface    
  CRM technologies, therefore, are much more than a simple suite 
of applications. CRM must be ﬂ  exible enough to stay in touch with a 
changing audience (the customer). It must reﬂ ect different requirements in 
different industries, as ﬁ rst discussed in Chapter 1. It must be accessible to 
external stakeholders and mobile professionals, such as salespeople and 
ﬁ eld technicians. It must operate over any communication channel, and it 
must integrate with other systems to provide a single view of, and for, the 

===== PAGE 392 =====
 
Information technology for customer relationship management 369
customer. Finally, it must be implemented in such a way that appropriate 
work processes and skills are deployed, as many of the objectives of CRM 
cannot be solved by technology alone. 
    The CRM ecosystem 
   The CRM ecosystem is made up of three major groups: CRM solutions 
providers, hardware and infrastructure vendors, and service providers 
( Figure 13.5   ). 
CRM
Ecosystem
CRM
solutions providers
Service
providers
Hardware and
infrastructure
vendors
 Figure 13.5 
      The CRM ecosystem    
    CRM solutions providers 
  The best known members of the CRM ecosystem are the CRM solution 
providers. Oracle, SAP , salesforce.com, Microsoft, and E.piphany are some 
well known examples. The independent research organization, Forrester, 
reports that worldwide revenue for CRM solution providers reached 
US$8.4 billion in 2006 and is forecast to grow to US$10.9 billion by 2010. 4
   CRM solutions can be clustered into three groups, as discussed below 
and shown in       Tables 13.1 and 13.2     : 
●       Enterprise CRM suites:   this category comprises vendor solutions 
primarily targeted toward organizations with revenues of more 
than US$1 billion per year and/or more than 1000 employees. CRM 
vendors focused on enterprise class organizations typically offer a full 

===== PAGE 393 =====
 
370 Customer Relationship Management
range of functionalities, can scale to serve large user populations and 
offer support for many industries, languages and currencies. They 
offer their products primarily through the traditional on-premise 
license model. However, several of the leading players now offer 
hosted or SaaS deployment options.  
   Enterprise CRM suites  Mid-market CRM suites 
   Amdocs CRM  Entellium 
   Chordiant Cx  GoldMine Corporate Edition 
   Onyx CRM  Maximizer Enterprise 
   Oracle’s E-Business Suite CRM  Microsoft Dynamics CRM 
   Oracle’s Siebel CRM  NetSuite 
   Oracle’s PeopleSoft CRM  Oracle’s Siebel CRM Professional Edition 
   Infor CRM E.piphany  Oracle’s Siebel CRM On Demand 
   Pegasystems Customer Process Manager  Pivotal CRM 
   mySAP CRM  RightNow 
 Sugar Enterprise 
 SageCRM 
 salesforce.com 
 Soffront CRM Suite 
Table 13.1        
Enterprise CRM 
suites and mid-
market CRM suites  
   Analytics tools  Customer service tools 
   SAS  ATG 
   SPSS  Applix 
   Teradata  eGain 
 Graham Technologies 
   Customer data management tools  KANA 
   Dun  &  Bradstreet  KNOVA 
   Initiate  Unipress 
   Purisma 
   Siperian  Marketing automation tools 
   VisionWare  Aprimo 
 Unica 
   Partner channel management and collaboration 
   BlueRoads  Sales force automation tools 
   Click Commerce  Sage Saleslogix 
   Comergent (Sterling Commerce)  Saratoga 
Table 13.2        CRM 
speciality tools  

===== PAGE 394 =====
 
Information technology for customer relationship management 371
●       Midmarket CRM suites:   this category comprises vendor solutions 
primarily targeted towards small and medium-sized businesses: 
organizations with revenues of less than US$1 billion per year and/
or less than 1000 employees. CRM vendors in this group also offer 
a breadth of CRM functionalities, but these often have more limited 
capabilities in speciﬁ  c areas and are simpler to use than solutions 
built for the large enterprise market. These vendors are less suitable 
for large-scale global deployments. Vendors in this group also offer a 
variety of deployment options, including on-premise license and SaaS. 
●       CRM speciality tools:   this category comprises vendors that offer 
solutions with narrow functional breadth but deep specialty capabilities, 
for both enterprise and mid-market organizations. Speciality CRM tools 
are available for marketing automation, sales-force automation (SFA), 
customer service, partner channel management and collaboration, 
customer analytics and customer data management. 
5
  The CRM solutions companies, however, are only a small proportion 
of the overall CRM ecosystem. CRM software must run on hardware 
platforms such as Unix or Intel-based computers and it must integrate 
with communications infrastructure such as telephony for call centres, 
web and e-mail systems. Hence, hardware and infrastructure vendors are 
also an important part of the CRM ecosystem. 
    Hardware and infrastructure vendors 
   For CRM goals to be achieved there often needs to be a high level of 
emphasis on hardware and infrastructure. Call centres, for example, need 
tight integration between the software on the customer service agent’s 
desktop and the automated call distributor (ACD) or switch hardware. 
Calls may need to be prioritized and routed based on CRM metrics, such 
as customer value or the customer’s propensity to churn. Handheld 
devices carried by salespeople need to be synchronized with the central 
CRM database. Hardware vendors such as IBM, Blackberry, Dell and 
Hewlett-Packard provide a range of solutions across the hardware 
spectrum, while infrastructure vendors such as Avaya, Genesys and 
Siemens provide telephony and CRM-related infrastructure solutions.  
    Service providers 
   The services component of the CRM ecosystem is the largest and the least 
clearly deﬁ ned. The use of service providers in a CRM implementation 
is often a critical factor in overall success of the implementation. Much 
of the CRM journey involves changes to strategy, business processes, 
organizational structures, skills and technical infrastructure, so good 
external advice and implementation can mean the difference between 
success and failure. Furthermore, some aspects of the front ofﬁ  ce, such 
as the call centre, may be outsourced either technically or as an entire 
business process. Service providers for CRM can be segmented, as 
shown in  Table 13.3   .    

===== PAGE 395 =====
 
372 Customer Relationship Management
    CRM solutions 
  Most CRM solutions, whether from enterprise, mid-market or speciality 
providers, are broadly aligned with the primary front-ofﬁ  ce functions 
of marketing, sales and service. However, not all CRM applications sit 
squarely in one or other of these functional areas. For example, some CRM 
modules focus on customers or products, rather than the operational 
processes performed by the marketing, sales and service departments. 
Customer and product management applications offer a suite of 
dedicated functions and modules that sit across sales, marketing and 
service. Companies that market, sell or service through channel partners 
use PRM (partner relationship management), a module of many CRM 
solutions. Finally, CRM analytics are often regarded as a separate suite of 
applications, with specialist solutions and vendors, as noted in  Table 13.2 .
  The following sections outline the main elements of each of these 
application areas. Modern CRM applications are extremely rich in features 
and functions, far beyond what can be practically presented here. 
    Customer and product management 
   Customer and product management applications may be components 
of a broader CRM application, or they may be built into a focused 
sales, service or marketing application. It is vital that the database 
recognize important attributes of, variance within, and relationships 
   Service Details Examples of service providers 
    Strategy 
consulting  
 Consulting support for the formulation 
of customer strategy, contact strategy, 
channel strategy, CRM strategy 
 McKinsey, Peppers and Rogers 
    Business 
consulting  
 Services around business process 
re-engineering, process improvement 
and best practices for CRM 
 Accenture, Bearing Point, CGEY 
    Application 
consulting  
 Design and development of application 
modiﬁ  cations, project management of 
software package implementation and 
training 
 CRM solutions companies, 
Accenture, CGEY , Bearing 
Point, IBM 
    Technical 
consulting  
 Design and implementation of technical 
infrastructure and integration of this 
infrastructure with the existing business 
processes and applications 
 Unisys, IBM, Logica 
    Outsource 
service
providers  
 Technology outsourcers and business 
process outsourcers 
 EDS, IBM, CSC, Acxiom 
Table 13.3        CRM 
service providers  

===== PAGE 396 =====
 
Information technology for customer relationship management 373
between, customers and products, as indicated in        Figures 13.6 and 
13.7     . For example, B2B organizations are not all the same: they vary in 
size, structure, buying roles and transactional histories. Similarly, not 
all products are the same. Off the shelf retail products are simple to 
classify and understand, each having a unique identiﬁ  cation number, 
but customizable products such as cars or computers, made of a wide 
range of chosen components, are less easy to classify and understand. 
Company and product management systems are often industry-speciﬁ  c 
or company-speciﬁ c.  
Households
Individuals
Profiles Relationships Addresses History
Roles Customer
products Opportunities Contact plans
Sales orders Service
requests ...
Organizations
Contacts
Organization
structures
Roles
B2C B2B
 Figure 13.6 
      CRM components – 
customers    
Pricing
Customers
Competing
products Products
Special pricing/
promotions
Quotes
and orders
InventoryKnown issuesComponentsCatalogues
Structures and
configuration rules
 Figure 13.7 
      CRM components – 
products    

===== PAGE 397 =====
 
374 Customer Relationship Management
    Marketing 
  CRMs deployment for marketing purposes enables customers or 
prospects to be segmented, lists to be generated, campaigns to be run and 
assessed, and leads to be allocated. Marketers also use CRM to help create 
marketing plans, manage marketing budgets and loyalty programmes, 
launch new products and administer channel partner relationships. 
Marketing applications must also enable customer communications 
to be delivered and integrated across many communication channels, 
including e-mail, newsletters, telemarketing, conventional direct mail 
and web marketing. In all cases, the CRM focus on segmenting and 
personalizing the marketing effort is made possible by the sophistication 
of the underlying applications and the availability of customer-related 
data.  Figure 13.8    shows a number of elements that typically form part of 
CRMs deployment for marketing purposes. 
    Sales 
   CRM sales applications typically support many different types of selling, 
ranging from complex selling in the business-to-business environment, 
to business-to-consumer telesales and browser-enabled self-service 
sales. These different types of selling could involve a team of people 
over time, channel partners, speciﬁ  c sales methodologies and territory 
management. Whatever the context, however, the focus is on managing 
the opportunity from initial identiﬁ cation through to close. Opportunity 
management applications track the sale as it progresses along the sales 
pipeline, and allow quotes, orders and forecasts to be generated from a 
single source. 
  The implementation of sales-force automation technology is often 
accompanied by the implementation of a sales methodology ( Figure 13.9   ). 
Without a methodology, salespeople will all use the system differently, 
Segments Leads/
opportunities
History Permission and
personalisationCustomers Attributes
CampaignsLists
Plans Budgets
Partners
Marketing
funds ActivitiesResponses
 Figure 13.8 
      CRM components – 
marketing
automation    

===== PAGE 398 =====
 
Information technology for customer relationship management 375
making sales management and prioritization of resources very difﬁ  cult. 
There are a number of sales methodologies available, and some CRM 
solutions have them pre-integrated. Selling over the web also presents 
a unique set of challenges. It requires some specialist applications such 
as shopping carts, storefronts, graphical catalogues and secure checkout. 
The emergence of product conﬁ  gurators has made it possible to sell 
complex products over the web. Selling often involves complex incentive 
and commission schemes, and these can be modelled in the CRM 
application to allow salespeople to assess the impact of winning a sale on 
their own personal compensation. 
   Finally, a key technology to support selling processes is mobile 
synchronization or wireless, which allows salespeople access to the CRM 
system while out of the ofﬁ ce and on the road. 
   Service and support 
   Service and support applications in CRM are also highly variable. 
Companies that service complex industrial products employ service 
engineers located in the ﬁ eld to visit customer sites, whereas companies 
that service consumers with a complaint require centralized teleservicing 
and a current knowledge base. The central element in CRM-enabled 
service is the service request or trouble ticket. This is used to track the 
service event through to completion, including service orders and issue 
resolutions. 
  As with sales-force automation, ﬁ  eld service also requires mobile 
technologies. In service, however, despatch and scheduling applications 
may be used. Scripts may be deployed (as in marketing and sales) in a 
teleservicing application to help agents to deliver a consistent customer 
dialogue.
Customers Buying
process Competitors Products Configuration
Leads Opportunities Quotes, proposals,
presentations Sales orders Customer
products
Activities Sales team Sales
methodology Territory Forecasts
Incentives Partners Objectives
and tactics  Figure 13.9 
      CRM components – 
sales-force
automation    

===== PAGE 399 =====
 
376 Customer Relationship Management
    Partner relationship management (PRM) 
   Many companies market and sell through channel members or 
service through specialist partners. This is known as collaborative 
CRM. Channel members and partners all require support if they are 
to manage the relationship with the end customer effectively ( Figure 
13.11   ). In addition to sales, marketing and service functionality, as 
described above, managing the partner relationship requires specialist 
functionality such as partner qualiﬁ cation and sign up, developing joint 
business plans and objectives, measuring performance, partner training, 
administration of marketing funds and rebates, and specialist partner 
incentive schemes. 
Dialogue
scripts
Service
requests
Service orders and
return material
authorizations
Resolutions
Agreements
and warranties Customers InventoryService teamActivities
Customer
products Products Known
issues Solutions
Maintenance
plans Manuals Defects
 Figure 13.10 
      CRM components – 
service automation    
Prospective
partners Partners
Campaigns
Service
requests
Pricing and
incentives
Objectives and
agreements
Marketing
funds
Training Leads
Customers Customer
products
Opportunities Figure 13.11 
      CRM components – 
partner relationship 
management    

===== PAGE 400 =====
 
Information technology for customer relationship management 377
  PRM most often requires a portal to be established in order to give 
partners access to the CRM system in a controlled, secure, yet collaborative 
way ( Figure 13.12   ). Data security and administration are also important 
functions, to ensure that competing partners cannot see each other’s data 
and opportunities, and to enable individual partners to administer their 
own users through the portal. 
 Figure 13.12        Example of a partner portal  6      
    CRM analytics 
   CRM analytics has grown in importance over the last few years. 
Organizations have realized that merely streamlining the customer-
facing operations in sales, marketing and service is not enough. 
Analytics can provide a deeper insight into the customer, reﬂ  ected in 
key CRM metrics such as customer value, satisfaction and propensity to 
churn. The three levels of analysis in today’s CRM systems, in increasing 
order of complexity, are standard reporting, online analytical processing 
(OLAP) and data mining. 

===== PAGE 401 =====
 
378 Customer Relationship Management
    Standard reporting 
   Reporting is an essential element of an effective CRM system. The 
foundation of CRM is an understanding and differentiation of customers – 
something which depends on good customer-related information. 
Reporting can take the form of simple lists of information, such as key 
accounts and annual revenues, to more sophisticated reports on certain 
performance metrics. 
  Reporting can be standardized (predeﬁ  ned), or query-based (ad 
hoc). Standardized reports are typically integrated into CRM software 
applications, but often need customization to suit the needs of the 
organization. Some customization of the report can be done when it 
is run, for example in selecting options or ﬁ  ltering criteria, but the end 
result is limited to what the report designers envisaged. For some 
industries, legislation or regulators require certain reports to be produced. 
Sometimes customized reports can be expensive to design and create. 
   Query-based reporting, on the other hand, presents the user with a 
selection of tools which can then be used to construct a speciﬁ  c report. 
This is far more ﬂ  exible, but it is not suitable for regular, standard 
operational level reporting due to the time required to set up the 
request for information. This is a powerful tool in the right hands, as 
it allows speciﬁ c reports to be requested, for example:  ‘ show me all of 
the customers that have expired on their maintenance agreement, in my 
territory, with annual revenues above $50 000 ’ . 
  As the requirement for analysis grows, the standard transactional 
information in the core CRM database may not be structured to deliver 
the best results; for this reason, online analytical processing (OLAP) has 
become an essential part of CRM.  
    Online analytical processing (OLAP) 
  OLAP technologies allow warehoused data to be subjected to analysis and 
ad hoc inquiry. Warehoused data is stored in one or more star schema, 
allowing users to drill down into graphs and tables to analyse how a 
certain ﬁ gure or problem may have arisen. The format used is known as a 
star schema because it contains a central fact table surrounded by several 
dimension tables, giving it the appearance of a star, as in  Figure 13.13   .  
  A data warehouse will typically contain several star schemas, each 
organized around a central fact table based on customers, opportunities, 
service requests, activities and so on. The customer schema, for example, 
may contain information such as customer sales revenue ﬁ gures, volumes, 
cost of sales, proﬁ t margins, discounts and promotional expense. OLAP 
users perform analysis against one or more schemas to answer a query. 
The schema format lends itself to ad hoc analysis, allowing the user to drill 
down into summarized information to investigate the underlying detail. 
   Two leading OLAP products are Hyperion’s Essbase (Hyperion is now 
part of Oracle) and Oracle’s Express Server. Some vendors prefer to use 
the term business intelligence rather than OLAP . 
  OLAP is valuable to a range of CRM users who have different types 
of questions to ask of the warehoused data ( Figure 13.14   ). Salespeople 

===== PAGE 402 =====
 
Information technology for customer relationship management 379
can analyse their territory to determine revenue and proﬁ  tability 
by customer. Service people can analyse call response rates and 
times. Partner managers can analyse the performance of partners by 
comparing marketing fund approvals to partner-generated revenues. 
   OLAP tools can also support decisions in real-time. For example, 
propensity-to-buy measures can be delivered to the call centre agent 
while the customer is on the telephone. This allows a tailored offer 
to be made that is more likely to receive a positive response from the 
customer. Real-time CRM is the result, an approach advocated by 
specialist vendors such as E.piphany ( Figure 13.15   ). 
Other systems, ERP , e-mail, telephone
Sales
(commissions,
revenues)
Support
(service requests,
response rates)
Management
(decision support,
customer value)
Marketing
(leads,
campaigns)
Product manager
(fault rates,
profitability)
Partner manager
(partner revenues,
marketing funds)
CRM system
Data
warehouse
Transaction
knowledge
base
 Figure 13.14 
      Different users 
demand different 
reports using OLAP 
technology  
8      
PRODUCT
Product_ID
Product_Desc
FACT
Region_ID
Country
State
City
REGION
Product_ID
Customer_ID
Region_ID
Year_ID
Month_ID
Sales
Profit
TIME
Year_ID
Month_ID
Week_ID
Day_ID
CUSTOMER
Customer_ID
Customer_NAME
Customer_Desc
 Figure 13.13 
      Star schema of data 
stored in a data 
warehouse  
7      

===== PAGE 403 =====
 
380 Customer Relationship Management
  An important element in CRM analytics is the information delivery 
mechanism. Information can be made available on the desktop in a web 
browser interface with graphical layout and drill-down. This approach 
requires the user to search for a result. Another method of delivery 
involves setting trigger points (e.g. when a customer logs more than a 
certain number of service calls in a month). The analytics application 
then pushes the related information to the user via e-mail or another 
alert mechanism. This approach, also known as  ‘ publish and subscribe ’ , 
is a powerful management tool.  
    Data mining 
   Data mining provides considerable CRM analytical power that is highly 
valued in some industries. Banking, telecommunications, insurance, 
public sector, retail and utilities all require analysis of huge volumes of 
consumer data, a task that is very difﬁ  cult without data mining. The 
data mining process seeks to identify patterns and relationships in the 
data, using selection, exploration and modelling processes. The results 
include, for example, churn scoring (likelihood that the customer will 
 Figure 13.15 
      Real-time CRM analytics  9      

===== PAGE 404 =====
 
Information technology for customer relationship management 381
leave), fraud propensity or credit risk, customer value scoring and 
campaign effectiveness scoring. 
  A number of CRM vendors specialize in advanced analytical and data 
mining applications ( Table 13.2 ). SAS Institute, for example, markets an 
 ‘ Intelligence Architecture ’  which comprises: 
●      data warehousing (storage)  
●      business intelligence (delivery) 
●      analytical intelligence (data mining, predictive modelling, forecasting, 
simulation and optimization). 
  Analytical applications such as these are important in CRM. For 
example, customer proﬁ tability can only be used as a performance metric 
if it can be measured. Data mining in conjunction with an activity-based 
costing system allows performance against this KPI to be assessed. 
Operational CRM applications can also draw upon customer value 
or churn scores during customer dialogue, to assist in targeting and 
prioritizing customer offers. 
    CRM architecture 
  A key consideration in effective CRM is the way in which the system is 
constructed, or the  ‘ architecture ’ . Unlike purely internal systems, CRM 
systems must be able to operate in the ofﬁ  ce, out of the ofﬁ  ce and over 
the web. They must tie together multiple communication channels, each 
using very different technologies (web, e-mail, telephone), and they 
must perform well enough, and be ﬂ  exible enough, to suit a constantly 
changing, potentially growing user community. 
  Very few CRM implementations are standalone; they are nearly always 
integrated with other inhouse systems, including back-ofﬁ ce systems. The 
challenges faced by the CRM architecture, therefore, are signiﬁ cant. CRM 
architecture can become a major limitation to the delivery of desired CRM 
outcomes. CRM project managers must consider architectural issues, as it 
can be very difﬁ  cult and costly, and perhaps impossible, to change the 
architecture of a system once it is installed. 
    Multichannel CRM 
   There are two perspectives on multichannel CRM that have developed 
over the last decade: multiple communication technology channels and 
multiple organizational touchpoints 
  The challenge here is that customers may choose to browse your website 
for information, e-mail you for pricing, and call you to discuss discounts – 
expecting consistency across the whole dialogue. Multichannel CRM 
technology is necessary in order to deliver an enhanced customer experience, 
including a feeling of recognition and consistency of service across all 
channels and touchpoints. 

===== PAGE 405 =====
 
382 Customer Relationship Management
    Multiple communication technology channels 
  Whether the customer chooses to communicate with your organization 
by telephone, e-mail, web chat or face-to-face, CRM technology lets 
you create and track a consistent dialogue that reﬂ  ects the value of the 
customer. Strategically signiﬁ cant customers may expect to get priority, 
irrespective of the communication channel they choose. They expect their 
inbound telephone calls and e-mails to go to the top of the list. To achieve 
this, in particular where e-mails from high value customers take priority 
over telephone calls from lower value customers, requires a central CRM 
database and a technology known as universal queuing. Universal queuing 
lists all communications in a single queue, irrespective of their origin or 
technology medium, and prioritizes response based on customer value 
or some other variable. In order to be effectively implemented, universal 
queuing requires the integration of the communications infrastructure 
(telephone, e-mail and web systems) with the CRM application (source of 
customer value metrics). 
    Multiple organizational touchpoints 
  The communications with a customer take place not only in different 
technology channels, but also with different people within your 
organization. Marketing sends out customer offers, sales representatives 
call to negotiate terms, and the customer calls the service desk for 
assistance. The marketing offer should be visible in order for the customer 
service agent to treat the customer correctly. This is even more important 
if the service desk is to perform a blended function, and cross-sell the 
customer an offer at the end of the service call. Finally, channel partners 
must be included in the communication loop if channel conﬂ  ict over 
pricing, leads and commissions is to be avoided. The technology solution 
for multiple contact channels includes an integrated suite of applications 
for all departments, customer and external partner web portals, universal 
implementation across the organization, synchronization technology 
(to get the information into the ﬁ  eld), and a central knowledge base for 
products, pricing and customer activity. While the technology challenges 
here are signiﬁ cant, the most difﬁ cult aspect of multiple contact channels 
is often the implementation of business processes across the departments, 
and externally, to allow a consistent customer dialogue. 
       Case 13.1   
  Channel integration at Dow Chemical      
   Dow Chemical, a leading science and technology organization, handles tens of thousands 
of customer inquiries each day across a large number of channels such as face-to-face, 
telephone, e-mail and the Internet. However, customer information being received through 
these channels was rarely consolidated. Without a comprehensive view of its customers Dow 
had difﬁ culty in delivering consistent levels of service and in cross-selling other products 
and services. 

===== PAGE 406 =====
 
Information technology for customer relationship management 383
   Mobile and wireless 
solutions
   Many businesses operate in the ﬁ  eld, with salespeople, merchandisers, 
meter readers and service technicians making calls on customers ’  home 
 Figure 13.16        Multichannel (360 degree) view of the customer  10      
   To address this problem Dow implemented a major CRM strategy utilizing Siebel software 
in conjunction with a new call centre. The implementation of the strategy involved 
substantial redesign of Dow’s operations and IT infrastructure. The management consulting 
ﬁ rm Accenture was also involved in implementing the strategy, which took 18 months to 
complete.

===== PAGE 407 =====
 
384 Customer Relationship Management
or business premises. These people play a signiﬁ  cant role in delivering 
excellent customer experience. They can only do this if they are 
equipped with the latest customer, product and technical information. 
The two main technologies that are available to support such mobile 
professionals are mobile (synchronized) and wireless (online). 
●       Mobile synchronized  solutions include a handheld or laptop device 
with a small resident database that is a replica of the particular 
individual’s information in the main CRM system. These systems are 
not online or permanently connected, but they rely on sophisticated 
synchronization technology to ﬁ  lter the information that ﬂ  ows onto 
the relatively small handheld device. The user synchronizes the 
device when convenient, for example before leaving home, ofﬁ  ce or 
depot in the morning. The advantage of such systems is that they 
operate in environments that could not otherwise sustain a permanent 
connection, such as aeroplanes, remote areas and basements. Mobile 
CRM clients can be as functional as their connected in-the-ofﬁ  ce 
counterparts. The disadvantage of mobile is that the synchronization 
process can be complex and unreliable, or may not scale well to large 
numbers of users with some vendor technologies. The mobile client 
may employ different technology to the connected client, and so may 
be functionally inferior. Another disadvantage is that information is 
only as current as the last time it was synchronized. Despite this, the 
mobile synchronized solution is currently the most widespread and 
accepted for mobile professionals.  
●       Wireless online   solutions also typically involve a handheld device. 
However, this device is connected to the main system using a wireless  
data connection. Technologies such as 3G, 4G and Bluetooth have 
enhanced the wireless online experience. Modern wireless broadband 
networks have largely removed the cost and performance penalties 
that were previously associated with wireless online solutions, 
especially in metropolitan areas. The advantage of being continuously 
online, with all the ensuing beneﬁ  ts of data currency, may offset the 
relatively minor connection and data cost differences. 
 Figure 13.17 
      Sample handheld 
screen views  
11      

===== PAGE 408 =====
 
Information technology for customer relationship management 385
    Integration 
  Integration is a major IT topic in its own right. Specialist integration 
middleware providers, such as Webmethods, IBM, SeeBeyond and Tibco, 
play an essential role in large-scale, complex CRM projects. 12 However, 
not all CRM integration requirements are complex. The integration 
challenge is largely a function of the complexity of the applications 
environment and the need for timeliness of information transfer. This 
gives rise to the two main types of integration: batch and real-time. 
●       Batch processing   is technically simpler than real-time, and can 
handle larger volumes with less impact on system performance. Batch 
processing stores information in a ﬁ  le or batch, and then moves the 
information across the interface into the destination system in one go. 
However, the delay in moving the information may be costly in terms 
of revenues lost and inadequate customer experience. Many batch 
processes only run overnight, meaning the information is always a day 
old in the destination system. International organizations that trade 
across time zones face a more complicated task, in that batch processing 
has to be synchronized with night time in different geographies. In 
general, it is preferable to use batch integration where it will sufﬁ  ce, 
for example when transferring information that does not change often, 
such as part number details. 
●       Real-time integration   takes place immediately. For example once a 
customer record is updated in one system, the change is immediately 
reﬂ ected in the destination system. Some forms of integration, for 
example telephony integration, must always be real-time, as the 
customer is on the phone at the time. 
   Whatever the integration method – batch or real-time – CRM systems 
generally face four integration challenges. 
    Application integration 
  Application integration ties together the CRM system and other business 
systems, such as accounting, billing, inventory and human resources. 
This type of integration can be either batch (for example, all records are 
changed at the end of day) or real-time (when an order comes in, it is put 
through to the warehouse immediately). 
  Application integration can be provided as standard by the CRM or 
other system vendors. However, in many cases this standard integration 
requires modiﬁ cation. Integration can also be handbuilt, although this 
becomes costly over time, as the interface between systems must be 
rebuilt each time a software upgrade is performed. Complex integration 
situations, where there are many applications requiring integration, 
normally require specialist integration middleware solutions that handle 
the ﬂ ow of information or messages between applications. These solutions 
typically deploy standard systems connectors for the most common 
applications. 

===== PAGE 409 =====
 
386 Customer Relationship Management
   Telephony integration 
   Telephony integration ties the CRM application into the telephone 
system, allowing inbound calls to be routed to the right person based 
on caller proﬁ  le, and outbound calls to be automatically made from 
the call centre desktop. At ﬁ  nancial services organization Capital One, 
this has meant that calls from customers who have not used their 
credit card for the last two months are routed to a customer retention 
specialist. At Qantas Airlines, if the call is from a customer who has 
recently made a booking, it is routed to reservations; otherwise it goes 
to general customer service. The effectiveness of the integration solution 
for telephony is essential to the success of large-scale contact centres. In 
addition, technologies such as universal queuing and predictive dialling 
can be deployed to further reﬁ ne the contact handling process. 
  Predictive dialling technologies are aimed at optimizing the productivity 
of call centre agents. These technologies monitor the call times, and predict 
when an agent is likely to complete the current call. The system will then 
dial the number of the next call, anticipating a pickup by the customer 
at the precise moment that an agent will complete the current call, hence 
minimizing unproductive time. While these systems can increase call rates, 
they must be carefully managed to ensure the quality and effectiveness 
of the customer interaction are satisfactory, and that agents do not suffer 
burnout from the increased workload. 
    E-mail integration 
   This is a similar form of integration to telephony in that it streamlines 
communications with the customer. It normally requires quite different 
technologies to be deployed. E-mail integration can involve both 
the generation of e-mails as a result of an internal workﬂ  ow process 
(e.g. once an order is ready for shipment, automatically e-mail the 
customer to advise despatch details), and automated e-mail routing and 
response. 
   E-mail response applications have developed quite sophisticated 
capabilities. Simple applications include automatic acknowledgements, 
such as responding to an inbound e-mail to the service desk, advising 
that the e-mail has been received, and the associated service request 
tracking number. More sophisticated applications can be designed to read 
inbound e-mails, recognize key phrases or patterns and automatically 
respond with the most probable answer (see  Figure 13.19   ). These systems 
can learn over time. However, they can create a negative customer 
experience when the customer receives a response that does not address 
their issue.  
    Web integration 
  A signiﬁ cant challenge for many organizations implementing CRM is the 
integration of the website. Most modern business have a website, and 

===== PAGE 410 =====
 
Information technology for customer relationship management 387
this website contains large amounts of content that is duplicated in the 
CRM system (customer registration details, solution knowledge base, 
product information, price lists, etc). The ideal position is for the website 
to draw this information from the CRM system, using integration 
technologies, or for the web application to be part of the core CRM 
system. Any unnecessary duplication of information will most likely 
result in errors and increased work, not to mention an unsatisfactory 
experience for the customer when, for example, the call centre advises a 
different price to the one on the website. 
   Web integration may also involve web chat or web collaboration. 
These technologies allow an organization to assist the customer over the 
web, without them having to leave the web page they are in. Examples 
include a simple call back over a telephone line, using a number 
provided by the customer, web text chat whereby the customer and 
the agent can have a dialogue over the web using chat windows, and 
interactive collaboration where the agent can effectively take control of 
the customer’s mouse pointer and help them to ﬁ  ll in a form or ﬁ  nd a 
document.
 Figure 13.18        Call centre service application showing telephony integration on the left, in 
the window titled  ‘ Availability ’   13      

===== PAGE 411 =====
 
388 Customer Relationship Management
    Web browsers 
   Web browser technology has become an essential ingredient of modern 
CRM systems, because of their ubiquitous accessibility to customers 
and channel partners. Conventional client/server technologies are 
not suitable for customers or partners, as they require the customer or 
partner client PC to have CRM software installed on it. An organization 
can neither expect, nor support, large numbers of customers having 
to install and maintain the company’s CRM software. Browser-based 
systems, on the other hand, require only a standard browser (perhaps 
of a certain release level) to be installed on the client machine. The CRM 
application then typically communicates with the web browser using 
HTML (hypertext markup language) or DHTML (dynamic HTML). 
 Figure 13.19        E-mail response screenshot  14      

===== PAGE 412 =====
 
Information technology for customer relationship management 389
   Browser technologies have other beneﬁ  ts that are important to CRM. 
The hyperlink-driven user interface is ideal for the loosely structured 
ﬂ ow of most customer-facing dialogues. The ubiquitous nature of the 
web also makes it relatively easy for people to learn how to navigate in 
such an application. This is particularly important with customer- and 
partner-facing applications. 
   Web technologies also play an important role in integration and mobile 
solutions. XML (extensible markup language), a standard, ﬂ exible format 
for the description of documents over the web, is becoming a standard 
language for integration between applications. The CRM application 
may communicate with the accounting system, for example, using XML. 
Wireless mobile solutions are also implemented using web servers and 
WML (a compact, wireless form of HTML) as a means of transferring 
information to and from the mobile device. 
    Knowledge management 
  A central contributor to effective CRM is storing and leveraging customer-
related knowledge. Note the use of the expression  ‘ customer-related ’ . 
We are not just talking about customer knowledge. Knowledge about 
customers includes not only structured data such as contact history and 
account balances, but unstructured information such as letters and faxes 
from the customer, and notes on telephone conversations. Customer-related 
data also includes a wealth of other types of information that is useful in 
marketing, selling and servicing the customer. This ranges across product 
features and beneﬁ ts, price lists, competitors ’  offerings, market research, 
service issues, business processes, company policies and much more. 
   Knowledge management can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
  Knowledge management is the organizational practice of consciously 
gathering, organizing, storing, interpreting, distributing and judiciously 
applying that knowledge to fulﬁ l the mission of the organization. 
   The achievement of the CRM vision depends largely on how well 
knowledge is deployed at customer touchpoints. In Chapter 4 you read 
about six attributes of good quality data, captured in the mnemonic 
STARTS: shareable, transportable, accurate, relevant, timely, and secure. 
Information available at the touchpoints needs to satisfy those six same 
criteria.
   Information needs to be  shareable  if several users require access to 
the same data at the same time, as might happen in the case of product 
speciﬁ cation data. Information also needs to be  transportable  from 
storage location to user. Data need to be made available wherever and 
whenever users require, on the website and on a service engineer’s 
laptop. Information also needs to be suitably accurate . Price lists and 
transaction histories need to be absolutely up to date, whereas it might 
be acceptable for market-related data such as industry sales forecasts to 
be 12 months out of date. Relevant  information needs to be available 
at the touchpoints. Sales representatives do not want to wade through 

===== PAGE 413 =====
 
390 Customer Relationship Management
masses of irrelevant information before they ﬁ nd what they need.  Timely
knowledge is available when needed. Knowledge that is important for 
competitive advantage needs to be secure . 
  The STARTS attributes have driven many companies to develop an 
IT-based knowledge management system which is capable of capturing, 
storing, organizing, interpreting (using data-mining tools) and distributing 
knowledge to users at customer touchpoints, so that marketing, sales and 
service objectives are accomplished. Knowledge bases need to be quickly 
accessed and searched for answers to ad hoc queries. Without a shareable, 
editable and searchable knowledge base, service people may resolve an 
issue but never share this solution with colleagues. A key element in being 
able to solve future customer issues is a way of storing symptoms verses 
resolutions, and categorizing service requests so they can be ﬁ ltered and 
analysed. This knowledge base can be used for solution searching and 
issue resolution in the future, by service agents, partners and customers 
over the web on an intranet or extranet. 
    Automated workﬂ ow 
  Many customer-related processes can be predeﬁ  ned and automated in 
modern CRM applications, meaning that business rules that are critical to 
the success of sales, marketing and service no longer need to be manually 
managed. Workﬂ ow technologies can also be programmed to monitor 
for predeﬁ ned conditions. They then respond to these conditions in a 
predictable and satisfactory manner ( Figure 13.20   ) .  
Start Assign
lead
Assign
error activity
Quality
High-quality
lead
Low-quality
Lead
Create
opportunity
note
End
Low
Unknown
High
Error
Default
 Figure 13.20       
 Example of 
a workﬂ ow 
process for lead 
assignment  15      
  Automated workﬂ ow engineering applies to many CRM processes, 
including the following: 
●       Service enquiry escalation:    ‘ if a service call is 20 hours old and is 
high severity, and is for a high value customer, and the status is not 
resolved, page the service manager ’   

===== PAGE 414 =====
 
Information technology for customer relationship management 391
●       E-mail response:    ‘ when an e-mail comes in from a customer in the 
southern region, automatically respond with the following …  ‘
●       Lead assignment:   ‘ when a lead comes in from the website, look at the 
product being offered, the territory, and the current workloads of my 
salespeople, and assign the lead to the best person ’
●       Dialogue scripting:   ‘ when a customer calls in, prompt the call centre 
agent with a standard welcome script. Register the customer’s 
response, then determine the best course of action, and offer the agent 
a script accordingly. Continue this process to increase the chance of up-
selling the customer ’
●       Log-in navigation:    ‘ if the customer does not offer their password, 
automatically navigate the user to the customer identiﬁ cation screen ’
●       System integration:    ‘ if the customer submits a conﬁ  rmed order, 
automatically post it to the fulﬁ  lment system for veriﬁ  cation and 
despatch ’ .
   Workﬂ ow functionality is usually embedded into enterprise and mid-
market CRM applications, and speciality CRM applications such as 
sales, marketing and service automation.
        Summary      
   In this chapter you’ve learned about the technologies that support the achievement 
of CRM outcomes. Today’s CRM technology has evolved from a range of standalone 
technologies, some of which date back to the 1970s and earlier. However, since the 
1980s, some organizations have consolidated these disparate technologies into uniﬁ  ed 
CRM offerings. The CRM ecosystem is made up of three major groups: CRM solutions 
providers, hardware and infrastructure vendors, and service providers. Most CRM 
solutions, whether from enterprise, mid-market or speciality providers, are broadly 
aligned with the primary front-ofﬁ  ce functions of marketing, sales and service. CRM 
analytics has grown in importance over the last few years. Organizations have realized 
that analytics can provide a deeper insight into customers, for example, their value, 
satisfaction and propensity to churn. Most CRM technologies allow users to receive a 
number of forms of management report, based, in order of complexity, on standard 
reporting formats, online analytical processing (OLAP) and data mining. 
   A key consideration in effective CRM is the system’s architecture. Unlike internal 
systems, CRM systems must be able to operate in the ofﬁ  ce, out of the ofﬁ  ce, over the 
web, and they must tie together multiple communication channels using technologies 
such as the web, e-mail and telephone. Very few CRM implementations standalone – they 
are nearly always integrated with other inhouse systems, including back-ofﬁ  ce systems. 
Many marketing, selling and service processes are predeﬁ ned and automated in modern 
CRM applications, using workﬂ  ow technologies. Another important technological 
contribution to effective CRM is storing and leveraging customer-related knowledge. 
Many companies have invested in knowledge management systems as a consequence. 

===== PAGE 415 =====
 
392 Customer Relationship Management
  References  
   1.       Much of this chapter is based on materials compiled originally by 
John Turnbull, founder and Managing Director of Customer Connect 
Australia, for the ﬁ  rst edition of this book. Refer to Chapter 3 in 
Buttle, F. (2004) Customer Relationship management: concepts and tools .
Oxford: Elsevier.  
   2.        Courtesy of CustomerConnect Australia,  www.customerconnect.
com.au
   3.        Courtesy of CustomerConnect Australia,  www.customerconnect.
com.au
   4.        Forrester, Inc. (2006) CRM market size and forecast: 2006 to 2010. 
www.forrester.com 
   5.        www.oracle.com/corporate/analyst/reports/ent_apps/crm/
forrester-crm-0207.pdf Accessed 28 November 2007. 
   6.        Courtesy of Soffront CRM,  www.soffront.com    
   7.         http://hubpages.com/hub/Star_schema . Accessed 28 November 
2007.
   8.         www.customerconnect.com.au 
   9.        Courtesy of E.piphany, which is now part of Infor CRM  http://
go.infor.com/inforcrm/    
  10.        Courtesy of PeopleSoft,  www.peoplesoft.com    
  11.        Courtesy of SAP ,  www.sap.com    
  12.        See Gartner Inc. (2007) Report highlight for market trends: portal, 
process and middleware software, worldwide, 2006–2011. www.
gartner.com. Accessed 10 November 2007. 
  13.        Courtesy of E.piphany,  www.epiphany.com 
  14.        Courtesy of PeopleSoft,  www.peoplesoft.com    
  15.        Courtesy of Siebel Systems,  www.siebel.com              
   In sum, CRM information technology enables consistent customer interaction across 
multiple channels of communication, encompasses mobile and web technologies, 
customer knowledge management and analytics, process automation though workﬂ  ow 
technologies, integration with other systems and technologies, and a broad suite of 
applications, over marketing, sales, service and partners, all of which may be customized 
or pre-conﬁ gured for industry-speciﬁ c requirements.        

===== PAGE 416 =====
 
    Sales-force automation  
 Chapter 14 

===== PAGE 417 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 418 =====
 
           Chapter objectives      
            By the end of this chapter you will understand:  
    1.   what is meant by sales-force automation (SFA)  
    2.   the members of the SFA ecosystem  
    3.   the beneﬁ ts derived from SFA  
    4.   the functionality that is available in SFA software applications  
    5.   what needs to be done to encourage salespeople to adopt SFA.         
    Introduction 
   This is the ﬁ rst of three chapters that look at CRM technologies. This 
chapter is about technologies used by salespeople and their managers. 
Subsequent chapters review marketing automation and service 
automation.
   Sales-force automation (SFA) has offered technological support to 
sales people and managers since the beginning of the 1990s. SFA is now 
so widely adopted in business-to-business environments that it is seen 
as a ‘ competitive imperative ’   
1   that offers  ‘ competitive parity ’ .  2   In other 
words, SFA is just a regular feature of the selling landscape. 
   Salespeople are found in a wide variety of contexts: in the ﬁ eld calling 
on business and institutional customers, in ofﬁ  ces, contact centres and 
call centres receiving incoming orders and making outbound sales calls, 
in retail business-to-customer settings, in the street selling door-to-door, 
and even in the home where party planners sell a variety of merchandise 
ranging from adult sex aids to cleaning products. All these sales contexts 
deploy SFA in some form or other. 
   The SFA ecosystem is made up of three components: SFA solutions 
providers, hardware and infrastructure vendors, and associated 
service providers. The technology enables companies to collect, store, 
analyse, distribute and use customer-related data for sales purposes. 
Customer-related data like this is the key to customer orientation 
3
and the development of long-term mutually beneﬁ  cial relationships 
with customers. 4   SFA software from solutions providers enables sales 
representatives and their managers to manage sales pipelines, track 
contacts and conﬁ  gure products, among many other things. SFA 
software also provides reports for sales representatives and managers. 
This chapter starts by deﬁ ning the ﬁ eld and identifying members of the 
SFA ecosystem.  

===== PAGE 419 =====
 
396 Customer Relationship Management
    What is SFA? 
   The term sales-force automation (SFA) can be deﬁ ned as: 
   Sales-force automation is the application of computerized 
technologies to support salespeople and sales management in the 
achievement of their work-related objectives. 
   Hardware and software are the key technological elements of SFA. 
Hardware includes desktop, laptop and handheld devices and contact 
or call centre telephony technology. Software comprises both  ‘ point ’
solutions that are designed to assist in a single area of selling or sales 
management, and integrated solutions that offer a range of functionality. 
The integrated packages can be dedicated to sales-force applications 
only, or can be incorporated into comprehensive CRM suites that operate 
over the three front-ofﬁ ce areas of marketing, service and sales. 
  All SFA software is designed so that pertinent customer-related data 
can be captured, stored, analysed and distributed to sales people and 
sales managers in order for them to become more effective or efﬁ cient in 
the pursuit of their objectives.  
    The SFA ecosystem 
   The SFA ecosystem consists of SFA solutions providers, hardware and 
infrastructure vendors, and service providers.  
    SFA solutions providers 
   SFA solutions providers can be classiﬁ ed in a number of ways. Some are 
SFA specialists. They compete against enterprise and mid-market CRM 
suites that include SFA modules, and enterprise suite vendors that offer 
a full range of IT solutions to support business, including supply chain 
management (SCM), enterprise resource planning (ERP) and customer 
relationship management (CRM). A number of illustrative examples are 
listed in  Table 14.1   .  
   SFA specialists  SFA as part of CRM suite  SFA as part of Enterprise suite 
   Selectica  Onyx  Oracle (including PeopleSoft and 
Siebel suites) 
   EzRoute  Pivotal  SAP 
   Salesnet  Salesforce.com  Epicor 
   CallWizard  SalesLogix  Deltek 
   Selltech  ACCPAC  Fourth Shift 
   CyberForms  NetCRM  Intentia 
Table 14.1        
Classiﬁ cation of SFA 
vendors  

===== PAGE 420 =====
 
Sales-force automation 397
   Some SFA specialists focus on particular areas of functionality 
within SFA. Selectica, for example, builds customized conﬁ  gurators. 
A conﬁ  gurator is a software-based application engine that allows 
companies to conﬁ  gure complex products and services based on pre-
deﬁ ned rules. Sometimes, customers interact directly with conﬁ gurators. 
For example, the Dell Computer website allows customers to build their 
own personal computers (PCs). Conﬁ  gurators guide users through 
the buying and speciﬁ  cation process, offering only valid options and 
features at each step. This can deliver beneﬁ  ts to customers, salespeople 
and management. Customers can deﬁ  ne and build their preferred 
customized solutions, reducing cost and meeting speciﬁ  cations. 
Salespeople no longer need to master comprehensive product or service 
technical data, because these are built into the engine. Training costs 
for salespeople are therefore reduced. The potential for incorrectly 
specifying a solution for a customer is decreased. Conﬁ  gurators enable 
mass customization (see Case 14.1).
       Case 14.1   
  Product conﬁ guration at General Motors      
   Lou Adler is responsible for helping car dealers conﬁ gure, order and price cars. For more 
than 15 years he lugged three binders between dealerships. One binder listed current 
models. Another listed available options. The third listed price information. It took Adler 
20 minutes to conﬁ gure each vehicle. Some dealerships asked him to conﬁ  gure 300 vehicles 
per sales call. It took a long time, and ultimately about 25 per cent of orders were rejected by 
the factory as impossible to build. Today, Adler takes two minutes to conﬁ  gure, price and 
order each car. He uses a product conﬁ  gurator called GM PROSPEC which has virtually 
eliminated factory rejection. 
   Many of the vendors offering SFA as part of broader CRM suites 
started out as SFA specialists, for example Siebel and salesforce.com. 
These brands now offer a wide range of marketing, service and sales 
automation.
    Hardware and infrastructure vendors 
  The performance requirements of SFA applications can create signiﬁ cant 
challenges for both hardware and technology infrastructure. Whereas 
ofﬁ ce-bound salespeople and sales managers might be happy to use 
desktop or laptop computers, ﬁ  eld sales representatives often want 
lighter, handheld devices, such as Microsoft-based Windows Pocket 
PC, Palm Pilot or Blackberry. Where companies have geographically 
dispersed external salespeople, SFA systems must be able to operate out 
of the ofﬁ ce and over the web. Mobile or wireless solutions are necessary, 
as the data held on portable devices must be regularly synchronized 
with the central database. SFA applications often need to integrate with 
a number of communication channels which use different technologies 

===== PAGE 421 =====
 
398 Customer Relationship Management
(e.g. web, e-mail or telephone). In growing industries and companies, 
SFA applications must be supported by hardware and infrastructure that 
can sustain increased numbers of users. 
    Services 
   The services component of the SFA ecosystem is very diverse. When 
a sales-force automation project is undertaken, service costs may 
signiﬁ cantly add to overall project expenditure. SFA project leaders 
might buy services from providers that re-engineer selling processes, 
manage projects, train salespeople, consult on organizational structure 
or conduct customer portfolio analysis. Service providers can 
contribute signiﬁ cantly both to SFA project costs and to the probability 
of success. 
   The hardware and software for a sales-force automation project may 
account for between 10 and 50 per cent of the overall costs. The balance 
is made up of service costs. Although some software vendor case studies 
suggest that payback is achievable within days, many projects take 
between 12 and 24 months to implement, let alone to yield a return. 
It has been suggested that the average implementation period is 21 
months
5   and that users need over 100 hours experience with the systems 
before they could claim to have mastered it.  6
    SFA software functionality 
   SFA applications offer a range of functionality, as listed in  Table 14.2   . Not 
all solutions provide the full complement of sales-related functionality. 
In the next few paragraphs, we’ll describe this functionality in more 
detail.
   account management  pipeline management 
   activity management  product encyclopaedias 
   contact management  product conﬁ  guration 
   contract management  product visualization 
   document management  proposal generation 
   event management  quotation management 
   incentive management  sales forecasting 
   lead management  territory management 
   opportunity management  workﬂ  ow engineering 
   order management 
Table 14.2       
 Functionality 
offered by SFA 
software  

===== PAGE 422 =====
 
Sales-force automation 399
    Account management 
  Account management offers sales representatives and managers a 
complete view of the customer relationship including contacts, contact 
history, completed transactions, current orders, shipments, enquiries, 
service history, opportunities and quotations. This allows sales 
representatives and account managers to keep track of all their obligations 
in respect of every account for which they are responsible, whether this 
is an opportunity to be closed, an order or a service enquiry.  Figure 14.1    
is an account management screenshot from CRM vendor salesforce.com. 
You will see that it shows account details, contacts, opportunities, 
activities and service cases that are unresolved. 
    Activity management 
  Activity management keeps sales representatives and managers aware of 
all activities, whether complete or pending, related to an account, contact 
or opportunity, by establishing to-do lists, setting priorities, monitoring 
progress and programming alerts. Activities include, for example, 
preparation of quotations, scheduling of sales calls and following up 
enquiries.
    Contact management 
  Contact management functionality includes tools for building, sharing and 
updating contact lists, making appointments, time setting, and task, event 
and contact tracking. Contact list data includes names, phone numbers, 
addresses, preference data and e-mail addresses for people and companies, 
as well as a history of inbound and outbound communications. Figure 14.2 
is an illustration of a contact management page from a CRM vendor. 
    Contract management 
  Contract management functionality enables representatives and managers 
to create, track, progress, accelerate, monitor and control contracts with 
customers. Contract management helps manage a contract’s lifespan by 
shortening approval cycles for contracts, renewing contracts sooner and 
reducing administrative costs. The software may use security controls to 
ensure only approved people have access to contracts. 
    Document management 
   Companies generate and use many documents as they sell to customers, 
for example brochures, product speciﬁ  cations, price lists, competitive 
comparisons and templates for preparing quotations. Document 
management software allows companies to manage these documents, 
keep them current and ensure that they are available to representatives 
and managers when needed. Some systems allow all documents to be 
‘attached’ to the account or contact, thus facilitating faster and fuller 
recall of past interactions.  
    Event management software 
   This software enables representatives and managers to plan, implement, 
control and evaluate events such as conferences, seminars, trade shows, 

===== PAGE 423 =====
 
400 Customer Relationship Management
exhibitions and webinars, whether run solo or jointly with customers or 
other partners. Some events, such as conferences, can be very complex 
and involve many stakeholders, such as sponsors, exhibitors, security 
partners, police, accommodation partners, travel partners, catering 
 Figure 14.1        Account management screenshot  7      

===== PAGE 424 =====
 
Sales-force automation 401
 Figure 14.2 
      Contact 
management
screenshot    
partners, lighting and sound contractors, speakers, invitees and the 
general public. Indeed, some major events are planned many years in 
advance; you only need to consider the Olympics or FIFA World Cup 
to appreciate the grand scale of some major events. Few, if any, sales-
related events reach a comparable level of complexity, but events to 
which customers and key partners are invited must run smoothly or the 
company risks being regarded as unprofessional. 
  Event management software contains a range of tools that can be useful 
to sales managers and others organizing events. These include an event 
calendar, online registration, partner management tools, event reports and 
analytics, attendee communication and management tools, badge creation, 
activity lists for exhibitors and venue management tools.  Figure 14.3 
is an illustrative event management screenshot from PCGuild. 
    Incentive management 
  Incentive management is an issue for sales managers who use commissions 
to lift, direct and reward sales representatives ’  efforts. In many companies, 
commissions are calculated using standalone spreadsheets. When part of a 
sales-force automation solution, incentive management eliminates the need 
to re-enter or transfer data from spreadsheets, leading to better visibility, 
accuracy and higher efﬁ ciency. Incentive management applications can be 
linked into back-ofﬁ ce payroll applications that automate payment. 
    Lead management 
   Lead management allows companies to create, assign and track sales 
leads. Leads either expire or convert into qualiﬁ  ed opportunities. 
User-deﬁ ned rules allow leads to be allocated to representatives and 
account managers on the basis of role, territory, product expertise or 

===== PAGE 425 =====
 
402 Customer Relationship Management
other variables. Lead management allows for more equitable workload 
distribution across a sales team, and uses security controls to ensure that 
representatives can only access their own leads. 
    Opportunity management 
  An opportunity is a record of a potential sale or any other type of revenue 
generation. Opportunity management software enables representatives 
and managers to create an opportunity record in the database and monitor 
progress against a predeﬁ ned selling methodology. Salespeople follow the 
steps as if following a checklist, ensuring that all opportunities are handled 
consistently. Sales representatives can view their own opportunities linked 
to additional information such as contacts, activities, products, proposals, 
projects, presentations, quotations, competitors, estimated revenue, 
cost of sales, probability of closure, sales stage and so on. Opportunity 
management functionality allows representatives to estimate their future 
bonuses or commissions. Managers can then receive reports on the 
progress of opportunities as they move towards closure, broken down 
by salesperson, territory, type, date or other criteria.  Figure 14.5    shows an 
opportunity management report. Note the selling model in the window 
on the left, at the bottom of the screen, and the probability of closing the 
opportunity at the top of the screen. 
 Figure 14.3 
      Event management 
screenshot  
8      

===== PAGE 426 =====
 
Sales-force automation 403
 Figure 14.4 
      Lead management screenshot  9      
    Order management 
  Order management functionality allows representatives to convert 
quotations and estimates into correctly priced orders once a customer 
has agreed to buy. If this is done in front of a customer, the order can be 
loaded into production or picked from a warehouse more quickly. Order 
management software may include a quotation engine, a pricing module 
and a product conﬁ gurator. With visibility through a portal, the customer, 
representative and manager have access to the same, up to date, order 
information.
    Pipeline management 
  Pipeline management is the process of managing the entire sales cycle, 
from identifying prospects, estimating sales potential, managing leads, 
forecasting sales, initiating and maintaining customer relationships, 
right through to closure. It relies on accurate, up-to-date opportunity 
information, such as the potential size and close date for each opportunity. 

===== PAGE 427 =====
 
404 Customer Relationship Management
 Figure 14.5 
      Opportunity management report  10      
A well-deﬁ ned sales pipeline helps minimize lost opportunities and 
breakdowns in the sales process. 
    Product encyclopaedias 
  A product encyclopaedia is a searchable electronic product catalogue 
that generally contains product names, stock numbers, images and 
speciﬁ cations. These can be stored on representatives ’  computers and/or 
made available to customers online.  
    Product conﬁ guration 
   Product conﬁ guration applications enable salespeople, or customers 
themselves, automatically to design and price customized products, 
services or solutions. Conﬁ  gurators are useful when the product is 
particularly complex or when customization is an important part of the 
value proposition.  

===== PAGE 428 =====
 
Sales-force automation 405
    Product visualization 
   Product visualization software enables sales representatives and 
customers to produce realistic images of products before they are 
manufactured. This is a useful application when linked to a product 
conﬁ gurator. The image can take the form of a simulated photograph, 
three-dimensional model or technical drawing, and can include other 
related documentation such as speciﬁ cations or prices.  
    Proposal generation 
  This allows users to create customized proposals for customers. Users 
draw from a database of information to create proposals which, typically, 
are composed of several parts, some of which are customized, including 
cover page and letter, introduction, objectives, products, product features, 
services, prices, speciﬁ  cations, pictures, drawings, people, experience, 
resumes, references, approach, schedule, organization, scope of work and 
appendices. 
    Quotation management 
   Quotation management software allows representatives and managers 
to quote for opportunities. This may be part of a broader order 
management capability. The software allows users to create, edit, 
approve and produce costed, customized, proposals quickly and reliably. 
Some vendors enable users to create multimedia proposals with audio, 
animation and video. One survey suggests that proposals produced 
with software have a much higher win rate (46 per cent) than proposals 
produced manually (26 per cent).  
11
    Sales forecasting 
   Sales forecasting applications offer sales representatives and managers 
a number of qualitative and quantitative processes to help forecast sales 
revenues and close rates. Among the qualitative methods are sales team 
estimates, and among the quantitative methods are time-series analysis 
and regression models (covered in Chapter 5). Accurate sales forecasts 
help resource allocation throughout the business.  
    Territory management 
   Territory management software allows sales managers to create, 
adjust and balance sales territories, so that sales representatives have 
equivalent workloads and/or opportunities. Some territory management 
applications come with a territory management methodology which 
users can follow when establishing sales territories. 12   Some applications 
link to geographic mapping or geodemographic software. The software 
enables companies to match sales coverage to market opportunity, create 
sales territory hierarchies (e.g. cities, states, regions) and reduce the cost 
of selling by reducing travel time. Call cycle scheduling, calendaring and 
lead management is often enabled by the software.  
    Workﬂ ow engineering 
  Workﬂ ow engineering software is useful for designing sales-related 
processes, such as the lead management process and the event 

===== PAGE 429 =====
 
406 Customer Relationship Management
management process. It can even be used to design the selling process 
itself – the series of steps that a sales representative must follow in shifting 
a prospect from initial awareness to closing the deal. 
  Although we have thus far discussed a generic set of sales-related 
functionality, SFA software is also designed for context-speciﬁ  c 
applications. For example, sales representatives selling liquor to a retail 
store might employ software that recommends planograms, optimizes 
the allocation of retail display space, audits inventory levels, recommends 
prices and controls cooperative promotional support. In some contexts 
graphics, video and sound support is important. Some SFA vendors offer 
functionality designed for salespeople in particular industries. Siebel, for 
example, offers customized solutions for over a dozen different industries 
ranging from aerospace and defence to transportation. SAP have pre-
conﬁ gured applications for over two dozen industry contexts. 
   Most SFA applications can generate a wide range of standard and 
customized reports which are useful to salespeople, sales managers 
and executive management, as shown in  Table 14.3.    Salesforce.com, 
for example, offers over 50 standard reports and also enables users to 
construct their own customized reports using wizards. These deliver 
charts, tables, text and other graphics to receivers ’  devices. Dashboards 
deliver real-time sales data to executives that can be refreshed at a 
single click. Customized dashboards ensure that people receive reports 
matched to their roles and responsibilities. Drill down capabilities 
mean that users can thoroughly investigate the reasons behind results 
in dashboard reports. Furthermore, dashboards can be integrated with 
third-party analytics to deliver deeper analysis of sales performance and 
problems. 
   cost-to-serve  sales cycles 
   customer proﬁ  tability  share of market 
   lead conversion  share of wallet 
   pipeline progress  sales person productivity 
   quotation performance  win–loss rates Table 14.3       
 Examples of reports 
available from SFA 
software  
    SFA adoption 
   Generally, a company’s determination to adopt SFA follows a two-step 
process. First senior management decides to invest in SFA and, secondly, 
sales representatives and their managers decide to use SFA. Both groups, 
senior managers and users, will anticipate beneﬁ ts from SFA and unless 
those beneﬁ ts are delivered SFA may be abandoned.  13

===== PAGE 430 =====
 
Sales-force automation 407
       Case 14.2   
  Freight Traders enjoys beneﬁ ts from SFA      
   Freight Traders, a subsidiary of global food manufacturer Mars Incorporated, is a web-based 
logistics consultancy that connects shippers to carriers. The company facilitates the transit of 
cargo between the two parties. Customers include Kellogg’s, Lever Faberge and Sainsbury’s 
Supermarket Group. Garry Mansell is Managing Director. 
   ‘ We had the system up and running in three days ’ , says Mansell.  ‘ Within eight days the whole 
company was using it across multiple countries. Ease of use and speed of implementation 
were everything I expected of a web-based solution ’ . Major beneﬁ ts include far greater 
   Motivation % of sample reporting 
   Improve efﬁ  ciencies  72 
   Improve customer contact  44 
   Increase sales  33 
   Reduce costs  26 
   Improve accuracy  21 
Table 14.4       
 Motivations for 
implementing SFA  15    
    Beneﬁ ts from SFA 
  Vendors and consultants claim a number of beneﬁ  ts from SFA 
implementation, including accelerated cashﬂ ow, shorter sales cycles leading 
to faster inventory turnover, improved customer relations, improved 
salesperson productivity, increased sales revenue, market share growth, 
higher win rates, reduced cost of sales, more closing opportunities and 
improved proﬁ tability. These beneﬁ ts appeal to differing SFA stakeholders: 
●       sales people : shorter sales cycles, more closing opportunities, higher 
win rates  
●       sales managers  : improved salesperson productivity, improved 
customer relations, accurate reporting, reduced cost of sales  
●       senior management  : accelerated cashﬂ  ow, increased sales revenue, 
market share growth, improved proﬁ tability. 
  In addition to these measurable outcomes, there may be additional beneﬁ ts 
such as less rework, more timely information and better quality management 
reports. Software vendor case histories of SFA implementations offer
testimonials to SFAs impacts (see Case 14.2 Freight Traders). 
   Independent research, summarized in  Table 14.4   , suggests that the 
primary motivation for implementing SFA is improved efﬁ  ciency, 
although not every SFA implementation has speciﬁ ed formal goals.  
14

===== PAGE 431 =====
 
408 Customer Relationship Management
    How SFA changes sales 
performance
   There have been a number of independent assessments of the effects 
of SFA on sales performance. 17   One empirical investigation of a 
pharmaceutical company’s operations in three countries ﬁ  nds a clear 
relationship between SFA adoption and salesperson performance. The 
researchers conclude:  ‘ Does the use of sales-force automation really 
contribute to higher sales performance? With overall sales growing 
and with 16.4 per cent of the variance in sales explained by the use 
of sales-force automation systems, this study suggests the answer is 
 ‘ yes ’ .’
18   Another investigation found that use of SFA was associated 
with improvements in sales representatives ’  selling skills, knowledge 
and performance. This research found positive correlations between 
SFA implementation and sales representatives ’  market knowledge, 
technical knowledge, targeting skills, adaptive selling and call 
productivity. Essentially sales representatives with SFA support became 
more adaptable and productive. Sales representatives ’  use of SFA 
accounted for a small, yet signiﬁ  cant, portion (7 per cent) of their sales 
performance.
19   However, not all research indicates positive outcomes 
from the implementation of SFA.  20   It seems likely that SFA will have 
more impact on sales performance when a number of conditions are 
met.21   These include: 
     1.     salespeople ﬁ nd that SFA is easy to use  
     2.     salespeople ﬁ nd the technology useful because it ﬁ ts their roles well  
     3.     availability of appropriate-to-task SFA training 
     4.     users have accurate expectations about what SFA will deliver 
     5.     users have a positive attitude towards innovation 
     6.     users have a positive attitude towards technology 
customer, lead and prospect visibility.  ‘ We operate dispersed account teams and they now 
have a single view of customers and prospects ’ . Another major beneﬁ  t is accessibility. 
 ‘ Regardless of where I am in the world, I only have to log on to see how our business is 
doing ’ , he says.  ‘ The reporting tools are really useful to our business ’ , continues Mansell, 
 ‘ we don’t need to waste time chasing sales teams for reports. Once we input the information, 
reports are automated and can be tailored to our requirements ’ . Mansell ﬁ nds these reports 
a valuable tool to the running of the business. It helps the company focus on maximizing 
resources by identifying where and when the best sales opportunities arise and responding 
to them. Freight Traders uses salesforce.com to communicate best practices across the 
organization.  ‘ Because the system is so transparent we can show clearly what works best 
with a particular company, country or industry and share that vital intelligence across the 
organization. All the information is contained in our salesforce.com account ’ . 
   Source: Salesforce.com  16

===== PAGE 432 =====
 
Sales-force automation 409
        Summary      
   Sales-force automation is a competitive necessity which involves the application of 
technology to support salespeople and their managers. Broadly, SFA enables members of 
sales teams to become more efﬁ cient and effective in their job roles. The SFA ecosystem 
includes a wide range of software, hardware, infrastructure and service organizations. 
SFA software offers an enormous range of functionality, including account management, 
activity management, contact management, contract management, document 
management, event management, incentive management, lead management, opportunity 
management, order management, pipeline management, product encyclopaedias, product 
conﬁ guration, product visualization, proposal generation, quotation management, sales 
forecasting, territory management and workﬂ ow engineering. 
   Three stakeholder groups – salespeople, sales mangers, and senior management – 
have a particular interest in generating beneﬁ  ts from SFA adoption and each may 
     7.     availability of user support after roll-out, for example, a helpdesk  
     8.     involvement of user groups, including sales representatives and 
managers, during project planning and technology selection  
     9.     deployment of a multidisciplinary team in the project planning 
phases
    10.     senior management support for SFA. 
   It is SFA users, not technology ﬁ rms, who decide what is easy to use. 
Some ease-of-use considerations include screen design, the use of a 
graphical user interface (GUI), system navigation, online help, user 
documentation, data synchronization and system support. Screen 
layouts that are clean, bright, appear uncluttered and are easy to 
navigate are appreciated. User interfaces are best if purpose-built for a 
particular screen layout. For example, it is not acceptable to take a PC 
screen design and merely cut it to size to ﬁ  t a PDA screen. A graphical 
user interface essentially involves the use of a pointing device and 
graphical icons to control a computer. The most common GUI is the 
Microsoft Windows system, which is deployed throughout the Microsoft 
Ofﬁ ce suite and related products. The basic components of a GUI are 
a pointer on the screen, a pointing device such as a mouse, graphical 
icons that represent commands, ﬁ les or windows, a desktop where these 
icons are assembled, windows which divide a computer screen allowing 
several ﬁ les or programmes to be run simultaneously, and menus which 
allow users to execute commands. System navigation is good if users can 
move from ﬁ eld to ﬁ eld, screen to screen, and function to function with 
no difﬁ culty. Online help that is available at ﬁ eld-level, as well as screen-
level, is valued by users because it means they can resolve questions 
quickly. User documentation that includes screenshots and textual 
explanation is appreciated, as is simple, fast, data synchronization and 
general system support through training and a helpdesk.

===== PAGE 433 =====
 
410 Customer Relationship Management
  References  
       1.          Morgan ,    A.   and   Inks ,    S.A.                ( 2001 )        Technology and the sales force . 
Industrial Marketing Management       , Vol.  30      ( 5 )       , pp.  463  –       472        .  
       2.          Engle ,    R.L.   and   Barnes ,    M.L.                ( 2000 )        Sales force automation usage, 
effectiveness, and cost-beneﬁ t in Germany, England and the United 
States .            Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing        , Vol.  15      ( 4 )       , pp. 
 216  –       242        .
       3.          Lambe ,    C.J.   and   Spekman ,    R.                ( 1997 )        National account management: 
large account selling or buyer-seller alliance?             Journal of Personal 
Selling and Sales Management       , Vol.  17      ( 4 )       , Fall , pp.  61  –       74            .  
       4.          Grönroos ,    C.             ( 2000 )        Service marketing and management: a customer 
relationship management approach          ,  2nd edn.        Chichester :       John Wiley              .  
       5.          Taylor ,   T.C.                ( 1994 )        Valuable insights on sales automation progress .
Sales Process Engineering and Automation Review       ,  December         , pp.  19  –       21        .  
       6.          Conner ,    K.R.   and   Rumelt ,    R.P .                ( 1991 )        Software piracy: an analysis 
of protection strategies .             Management Science        , Vol.  37      ( 2 )       , February, 
pp. 125  –       139            .
       7.         Copyright © 2008. SAS Institute Inc. All rights reserved. Reproduced 
with permission of SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA. 
       8.         Courtesy of PCGuild,  http://www.pcguild.com/database.html       
       9.         Courtesy of salesboom.com,  www.salesboom.com       
      10.         Courtesy of Siebel Systems, http://www.oracle.com/applications/
crm/siebel/resources/siebel-salesforce-sales-data-sheet.pdf. 
Accessed 25 January 2008. 
      11.         http://www.realmarket.com/news/pragmatech121102.html. 
Accessed 21 November 2007. 
      12.             http://download-uk.oracle.com/docs/cd/B11454_01/11.5.9/
acrobat/jty115ig.pdf       
      13.          Speier ,    C.   and   Venkatash ,    V .                ( 2002 )        The hidden mineﬁ elds in the 
adoption of sales force automation technologies .             Journal of Marketing       ,  
Vol.  66      ( 3 )       , July, pp.  98  –       111            .  
      14.         Erffmeyer, R.C. and Johnson, D.A. (2001) An exploratory study of 
sales force automation practices: expectations and realities.  Journal of 
Personal Selling and Sales Management , Vol. 21(2), Spring, pp. 167–175; 
Ingram, T.N., LaForge, R.W. and Leigh, T.W. (2002) Selling in the 
new millennium: a joint agenda. Industrial Marketing Management  , 
Vol. 31(7), pp. 559–567. 
have a different take on success. For a salesperson, success might mean  ‘ increased 
commission ’  or ‘more time released from administrative tasks for selling ’. For a sales 
manager, success might be  ‘better management of underperforming reps ’. For senior 
management, success might be  ‘ improved market share and reduced cost-to-serve ’ . 
   None of these beneﬁ  ts are likely to be delivered if salespeople fail to adopt the 
technology. Adoption is more likely if salespeople ﬁ  nd the technology is useful, easy to 
use and they receive appropriate training.        

===== PAGE 434 =====
 
Sales-force automation 411
      15.          Erffmeyer ,    R.C.   and   Johnson ,    D.A.                ( 2001 )        An exploratory study of 
sales force automation practices: expectations and realities .            Journal of 
Personal Selling and Sales Management       , Vol.  21      ( 2 )       , Spring, pp.  167  –       175            .  
      16.         http://www.salesforce.com/customers/casestudy.jsp?customer /H11005
ft. Accessed 26 August 2005      
      17.         Erffmeyer, R.C. and Johnson, D.A. (2001) An exploratory study of 
sales force automation practices: expectations and realities.  Journal of 
Personal Selling and Sales Management , Vol. 21(2), Spring, pp. 167–175; 
Engle, R.L. and Barnes, M.L. (2000) Sales force automation usage, 
effectiveness, and cost-beneﬁ t in Germany, England and the United 
States. Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing  , Vol. 15(4), pp. 
216–242; Ahearne, M. and Schillewaert, N. (2001)  The acceptance of 
information technology in the sales force  . eBusiness Research Center, 
Working paper 10–2000. Penn State University. 
      18.          Engle ,    R.L.   and   Barnes ,    M.L.                ( 2000 )        Sales force automation usage, 
effectiveness, and cost-beneﬁ t in Germany, England and the United 
States .            Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing        , Vol.  15      ( 4 )       , pp. 
 216  –       242        .
      19.         Ahearne, M. and Schillewaert, N. (2001).  The acceptance of information 
technology in the sales force . eBusiness Research Center, Working paper 
10–2000. Penn State University. 
      20.         See review of SFA research in Buttle, F., Ang, L. and Iriana, R. (2006) 
Sales force automation: review, critique research agenda.  International
Journal of Management Reviews , Vol. 8(4), pp. 213–231. 
      21.         This section draws on Buttle, F., Ang, L. and Iriana, R. (2006) Sales 
force automation: review, critique research agenda.  International
Journal of Management Reviews , Vol. 8(4), pp. 213–231. 

===== PAGE 435 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 436 =====
 
    Marketing automation  
 Chapter 15 

===== PAGE 437 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 438 =====
 
           Chapter objectives      
   By the end of this chapter you will understand: 
    1.   what is meant by marketing automation (MA)  
    2.   the beneﬁ ts that MA can deliver to organizations  
    3.   the functionality available within MA software.         
    Introduction 
  This is the second of three chapters that look at CRM technologies. This 
chapter is about technologies used by marketers. The preceding chapter 
reviewed sales-force automation and the next examines service automation. 
The chapter starts with a deﬁ  nition of marketing automation (MA) and 
then describes some of the functionality that is available in MA software. 
    What is marketing 
automation?
  Marketing practices have historically been very ad hoc. Some of the major 
companies, particularly fast-moving consumer goods companies such as 
Unilever and Procter and Gamble, have bucked the trend and developed 
marketing processes which brand managers and market managers are 
obliged to follow. However, they are the exception. In general, marketers 
have not been structured in the way that they plan, implement, evaluate 
and control their marketing strategies and tactics. Marketing automation 
has brought increased rigour to marketing processes. The term marketing 
automation (MA) can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
   Marketing automation is the application of computerized 
technologies to support marketers and marketing management in 
the achievement of their work-related objectives. 
  A very wide range of marketing positions can make use of MA including 
marketing managers, campaign managers, market analysts, market 
managers, promotions managers, database marketers and direct 
marketing managers. 
  Hardware and software are the key technological elements of MA. 
Hardware includes desktop, laptop and handheld devices. Software 
comprises both  ‘ point ’  solutions that are designed to assist in a single area 
of marketing or marketing management, and integrated solutions that 
offer a range of functionality. Some integrated packages are dedicated to 
marketing applications only; others are incorporated into broader CRM 

===== PAGE 439 =====
 
416 Customer Relationship Management
solutions that operate over the three front-ofﬁ  ce areas of marketing, 
service and sales. 
    Beneﬁ ts of marketing 
automation
   Marketing automation can deliver several beneﬁ ts. These include: 
●       Enhanced marketing efﬁ ciency : the replication of marketing processes 
delivers greater control over costs. When marketers use manual 
systems and ad hoc processes there can be considerable inefﬁ ciencies. 
MA enables companies to develop more streamlined, cost-efﬁ  cient 
processes that can be operated by any marketing incumbent, whether 
experienced or new to the role. 
●       Greater marketing productivity  : in the days before MA marketers 
might have been expected to run a modest number of advertising 
campaigns and sales promotions in a single year. MA enables 
companies to run dozens, even thousands, of campaigns and events 
through multiple channels simultaneously.  
●       More effective marketing  : MA allows marketers to employ what 
is known as closed-loop marketing (CLM). CLM is based on a plan–
do–measure–learn cycle, as illustrated in  Figure 15.1   . Marketers plan 
a campaign or event, implement the plan, measure the outcomes, 
learn from the outcomes and subsequently modify the next campaign 
or event. CLM ensures that companies learn continuously from their 
marketing activities, achieving higher levels of marketing effectiveness. 
Companies can also identify and abandon failing marketing initiatives 
before they drain ﬁ nancial resources. 
Learn
Plan
Do
Measure
Database
 Figure 15.1 
      Closed-loop 
marketing    

===== PAGE 440 =====
 
Marketing automation 417
●       Enhanced responsiveness  : marketers have traditionally created 
and implemented annual marketing plans with campaigns and 
promotions planned and scheduled many months ahead. MA allows 
marketers to respond instantly to opportunities, even if they are 
not part of a plan. MA functionality enables companies to engage 
in real-time marketing, responding immediately to an identiﬁ  ed 
opportunity. For example, when a female customer buys baby clothes 
from a catalogue for the ﬁ  rst time, marketers can send an automated 
invitation to the customer to join a mother and baby club which offers 
additional customer beneﬁ ts to new mothers.  
●       Improved marketing intelligence : embedded reporting and analytics 
functionality provides valuable management insights into markets, 
customers, campaigns, events and so on, leading to enhanced efﬁ ciency 
and effectiveness. 
●       Improved customer experience  : customers receive personalized, 
relevant communications and offers at appropriate times. MA means 
less spam, from the customer’s perspective. 
    Software applications for 
marketing
   Marketing automation applications offer a range of functionality, as 
listed in  Table 15.1   . The table lists both macromarketing automation 
solutions that offer a wide range of functionality, and micromarketing 
automation solutions that offer a narrow range of functionality. The 
macro solutions, such as enterprise marketing management, deliver 
   Asset management  Market segmentation 
   Campaign management  Marketing analytics 
   Customer segmentation  Marketing optimization 
   Direct mail campaign management  Marketing performance management 
   Document management  Marketing resource management 
   Email campaign management  Partner marketing 
   Enterprise marketing management  Product lifecycle management 
   Event-based marketing  Search engine optimization 
   Internet marketing  Telemarketing 
   Keyword marketing  Trigger marketing 
   Lead generation  Web analytics 
   Loyalty management  Workﬂ  ow engineering 
Table 15.1       
 Functionality 
offered by MA 
software  

===== PAGE 441 =====
 
418 Customer Relationship Management
much of the functionality present in the micro solutions. In the next few 
paragraphs, we’ll describe this functionality in more detail. 
    Asset management 
  Asset management enables companies to identify and track the assets 
that customers purchase, license, use, install or download. Assets can 
be tangible, intangible or blended. The pallet hire company, CHEP , uses 
asset management to track where its tangible assets, pallets, are in their 
network, whether at customer sites, depots or in transit, and to ensure 
that customers are only billed for the periods when the pallets are in use 
by that customer. Jim Beam uses asset management to track the use of 
its intangible asset, the Jim Beam brand, by other manufacturers. NXT 
uses asset management to track the licensed use of its blended tangible 
and intangible assets, manufacturing processes and technology, by 
other companies that want to manufacture ﬂ  at panel speakers. Asset 
management can also be used to track and monitor the use of marketing 
assets such as point-of-sale materials and exhibition kiosks by customers, 
partners or sales representatives.  
    Campaign management 
  Campaign management automates the processes involved in planning, 
implementing, measuring and learning from communication programmes 
targeted at prospects or customers. Campaigns may be used to raise 
awareness, inﬂ uence emotions or motivate behaviours, such as buying a 
product or visiting a website. The key elements of campaign management 
software are workﬂ  ow, segmentation and targeting, personalization, 
execution, measurement, modelling and reporting. 
●       Workﬂ ow : before any campaign is run, the overall campaign development 
process must be designed. Workﬂ  ow establishes the order in which 
tasks have to be performed. The tasks may include setting measurable 
objectives, setting a budget, getting approvals, creating a database of 
contacts, selecting contacts, creating a core message, testing the core 
message, customizing the message for individual recipients, selecting 
communication channels, executing the campaign, measuring response, 
reporting outcomes and reviewing and learning from the campaign. 
●       Segmentation and targeting  : the customer base or source list can 
be divided into subsets so that one or more subsets can be subjected 
to a customized campaign. Segmentation is the process of identifying 
subsets; targeting is the selection of the subset(s) that will receive the 
material. A common approach to segmentation is to partition customers 
based on recency of purchase, frequency of purchase and monetary 
value of purchase, targeting different offers at different subsets. 
●       Personalization : core messages and offers are tailored for individual 
recipients.  
●       Execution : the campaign is run when the message is delivered 
through the selected communication channels. Campaigns can be run 

===== PAGE 442 =====
 
Marketing automation 419
in many channels, independently, consecutively or simultaneously by 
direct mail, e-mail, telephone, fax or text message.  
●       Measurement : the results from the campaign are assessed at segment 
and individual recipient level. Measures focus on whether the 
objectives originally set have been achieved.  
●       Modelling : is the process of interpreting campaign results statistically, 
so that future campaigns can be based on statistical insight into what 
works and what does not.  
●       Reporting : campaign results are computed and delivered in standard 
or customized management reports to relevant parties. 
   The ability to run integrated marketing campaigns over multiple 
channels, optimize campaigns and integrate with sales and service 
applications are important considerations for large-enterprise users of 
campaign management.
       Case 15.1   
  Campaign management at Harrah’s Entertainment      
   Harrah’s Entertainment is the world’s largest gaming organization. Through Harrah’s Total 
Rewards programme customers earn credits each time they visit and play. Accumulated 
credits are traded for rewards, cash, coupons or complementary services, and tallied to 
determine customer loyalty levels of gold, platinum or diamond. Associated services and 
privileges become increasingly valuable at each higher level. 
   The Total Rewards programme is a key component of Harrah’s CRM strategy and underpins 
the company’s marketing campaigns. Customer-related data, gained primarily from card 
use, is enriched from other data sources so that Harrah’s obtains detailed understanding of 
their customer proﬁ les and behaviours. 
   Harrah’s ﬁ rst established a data-based marketing approach in 1998. Using historical data, 
which showed how often customers visited and how much they spent, these early modelling 
efforts provided basic segmentation based on various demographic trends. Currently 
Harrah’s applies predictive analytics to the customer-related data which can generate an 
accurate estimate of each customer’s potential value. 
   Historical data shows how often a customer visits Harrah’s casinos, but predictive models 
will reveal which customers are also likely to visit other casinos in the market. Based on 
share of wallet estimates, Harrah’s can target them with campaigns that attempt to increase 
their loyalty to Harrah’s casinos. As a consequence, Harrah’s was able to increase its share of 
customers ’  gaming budgets from 36 per cent in 1998 to 45 per cent in 2005. 
   Source: SAS  1
  According to independent analysts, Gartner Inc., leading solutions 
for multichannel campaign management include SAS, Teradata and 
Afﬁ nium campaign management from Unica. 2   Afﬁ nium, for example, is 

===== PAGE 443 =====
 
420 Customer Relationship Management
a comprehensive campaign management solution that allows companies 
to create, test, deploy and analyse multiwave, multichannel personalized 
communications. It offers optional modules for e-mail authoring and 
execution, real-time personalization, distributed campaign execution 
and cross-campaign optimization. This and similar products allow 
organizations to deliver personalized, one-to-one marketing messages 
across all touchpoints. Key features include: 
●      a web-based interface 
●      workﬂ ow for designing, executing and analysing, transactional, real-
time, event-triggered and scheduled communications  
●      integrated customer analytics and predictive models for enhanced 
targeting  
●      automated response tracking  
●      the ability to merge and transform campaign data across databases 
and operational systems  
●      built-in and repeatable processes that speed training and time to 
market.
    Customer segmentation 
   Customer segmentation is the practice of partitioning customers into 
homogenous subsets so that each subset can be addressed as a unique 
marketing audience. Historically, segmentation by marketers has been 
very intuitive. However, as you read in Chapter 5, when customer 
segmentation is performed from a CRM perspective, it is much more 
data-based. Both consumers and organizational customers can be 
grouped into clusters, based on a wide range of user attributes and 
usage attributes. In the data-driven world of CRM, marketers often need 
to use statistical processes to help them identify clusters of customers. 
Among the widely employed statistical processes are cluster analysis, 
discriminant analysis, classiﬁ cation and regression trees (CART) and chi-
square automatic interaction detection (CHAID).  
3
   Cluster analysis aims to sort cases (customers, in this instance) into 
groups, or clusters, so that the degree of association is strong between 
members of the same cluster and weak between members of different 
clusters. Cluster analysis can reveal associations between customers 
which, although not previously evident, are nevertheless sensible and 
useful once discovered. 
  Discriminant analysis is used to determine which variables discriminate 
between two or more naturally occurring groups. For example, a marketer 
may want to investigate which variables discriminate between buyers of 
standard size packs and buyers of economy size packs. A large number of 
variables are entered into the statistical routine and discriminant analysis 
is able to identify the variables which discriminate between purchasers of 
the two pack sizes. Those variables can then be regarded as predictors of 
pack size purchase. 
   CART is a non-parametric statistical methodology for resolving 
classiﬁ cation problems involving either categorical (nominal or ordinal) 

===== PAGE 444 =====
 
Marketing automation 421
or continuous (interval or ratio) dependent variables. If the dependent 
variable is categorical (e.g. buy/not buy), CART produces a classiﬁ cation 
tree. If the dependent variable is continuous (buys x, y  …  n occasions), it 
produces a regression tree (see  Figure 15.2   ). 
Node 6
Distance /H11021/H11005 1.35735
N /H11005 5, W /H11005 5
Median value /H11005 45.580
Std. dev. /H11005 8.840
Node 7
Distance /H11022 1.35735
N /H11005 250, W /H11005 250
Median value /H11005 22.905
Std. dev. /H11005 3.858
Node 8
Crime rate /H11021/H11005 6.966832
N /H11005 101, W /H11005 101
Median value /H11005 17.138
Std. dev. /H11005 3.375
Node 9
Crime rate /H11022  6.966832
N /H11005 74, W /H11005 74
Median value /H11005 11.978
Std. dev. /H11005 3.831
Node 5
Lower status /H11022  14.4
N /H11005 175, W /H11005 175
Median value /H11005 14.956
Std. dev. /H11005 4.390
Node 4
Lower status /H11021/H11005 14.4
N /H11005 255, W /H11005 255
Median value /H11005 23.350
Std. dev. /H11005 5.100
Node 2
Num. rooms /H11021/H11005 6.941
N /H11005 430, W /H11005 430
Median value /H11005
 19.934
Std. dev. /H11005 6.346
Node 3
Num. rooms /H11022 6.941
N /H11005 76, W /H11005 76
Median value /H11005 37.238
Std. dev. /H11005 8.929
Node 1
(Entire Group)
N /H11005 506, W /H11005 506
Median value /H11005 22.533
Std. dev. /H11005 9.188
 Figure 15.2        Illustration of regression tree output using CART  4      
   CHAID is used to explore the relationships between a dependent 
variable (e.g. buyers or non-buyers of a product) and a number of 
possible predictor variables (such as age, gender, post-code, marital 
status, income, educational attainment, occupational status) that 
themselves may interact. The output of a CHAID analysis is a tree 
diagram that discriminates between buyers and non-buyers on the basis 
of the other variables. 
   Once customers have been clustered they can be treated to a range 
of customized and personalized communications and offers over time, 
designed to build value, multi-product ownership and loyalty. It is 
important to continue to ﬁ  nd new ways of segmenting the customer 
base, as new clusters will often signal additional opportunities for value 
creation.  

===== PAGE 445 =====
 
422 Customer Relationship Management
    Direct mail campaign management 
   Direct mail campaign management is a speciﬁ  c form of campaign 
management in which the communication medium is direct mail. 
According to the World Postal Union: 
  ‘ Worldwide postal statistics show very low growth in letter mail 
volumes. One exception, however, has been direct mail, which 
is experiencing signiﬁ  cant growth in many parts of the world. 
Evidence shows that this growth has reached double digits in some 
developing countries. Even in more mature markets, there are still 
expectations of growth ’ .
5
   However, according to Euromonitor, UK spending on direct mail reached 
£2.6 billion in 2004 and forecasters were predicting that spending would 
stabilize at these levels because of direct mail’s association with junk 
mail.6   The Direct Mail Information Service (DMIS) reports 2005 direct 
mail expenditures of £2.3 billion, split between consumer (77 per cent) 
and business (23 per cent) mailings.  7
  Direct mail has many applications including lead generation, lead 
conversion, building awareness, up-selling and cross-selling, customer 
retention, database building or image enhancement. Important 
contributors to direct mail success are the list, the creative execution, 
the offer and the timing. Making the right offer to the right person at 
the right time in the right way will produce greater success. Automated 
processes can help deliver all these outcomes. A high quality list that 
is clean and contemporary, a creative execution that catches the eye 
and promotes action, an offer that is determined by the list member’s 
propensity to buy and that is personalized, will achieve greater success 
that the conventional mass mailouts that have been marketing’s tradition. 
The old cry that ‘ it’s a numbers game ’  has been replaced by a clear focus 
on customized, personalized offers. The average response rate for both 
business and consumer mailings is around 8.5 per cent; about one in 12 
recipients does what the mailer wants them to do, whether that is register 
for an event, redeem a coupon or call a toll-free number. Response 
rates range from below 1 per cent to over 30 per cent (for government 
mailings).
8   Many companies elect to outsource direct mail campaigns to 
third-party service providers, who are themselves big users of marketing 
automation.
Document management
   Companies generate and use many documents in their marketing 
activities. These include brochures, product speciﬁ  cations, price lists 
and competitive comparisons. Document management software allows 
companies to manage these documents, keep them current and ensure 
that they are available to marketing people when needed. Typically, 
these documents are held in a central repository and made available to 
users in their browsers.  

===== PAGE 446 =====
 
Marketing automation 423
    E-mail campaign management 
  E-mail campaign management is a speciﬁ c form of campaign management 
in which the communication medium is e-mail. E-mail is cheap, easy to 
use and ubiquitous. Over 90 per cent of Internet users have one or more 
e-mail addresses.  9   E-mail marketing is a massive industry. In the US alone, 
eMarketer estimates that spending on e-mail marketing will grow from 
$338 million in 2006 to $616 million in 2011.  10   Legitimate e-mail marketing 
is tainted by the widespread use of e-mail spam, that is, unsolicited bulk 
e-mail. Fifty per cent or more of e-mail messages are spam. The typical 
legitimate opt-in (or permission-based) e-mail marketing message contains 
text and a link through to a website. Open and click-through rates, the 
most commonly used e-mail marketing metrics, provide marketers with 
some insight into how an e-mail message has performed. These metrics 
can be combined into a click-to-open rate (CTOR) that measures click-
through rates as a percentage of messages opened, instead of messages 
delivered. As with all customer communications, it is very important to 
specify clear objectives. If the objective is to sell 100 units, reporting success 
in terms of CTOR makes little sense. 
  There is a signiﬁ  cant and growing volume of research into the 
effectiveness of e-mail marketing. The corporate website,  www.
e-maillabs.com , the E-mail Experience Council ( www.e-mailexperience.
org ) and the E-mail Statistics Center ( www.e-mailstatcenter.com ) act as 
gateways to many of these resources. Among the statistics they cite are 
the following, which collectively indicate the potential of, and problems 
with, e-mail: 
●      for every dollar spent on e-mail marketing in 2007, marketers obtained 
$48 return on investment (ROI), compared to $7 for print catalogues  
●      the US e-mail marketing industry is estimated at $3 billion in 2007, 
inclusive of $1.15 billion for all the technology, agency, consultant and 
service providers  
●      e-mail generated sales in the US will show a compound annual 
growth of 14.9% from 2006 to 2011  
●      the average order conversion rate of e-mail is 6%  
●      permission e-mail marketing now accounts for 27% of the e-mail that 
consumers receive in their primary personal inboxes, up from 16% 
in 2003  
●      one in ﬁ ve e-mail is invisible and ineffective due to blocked images  
●      45% of click-through landing pages do not repeat the promotional 
copy found in the e-mail, thus failing to reinforce the call-to-action 
that prompted the e-mail recipient to click on the link in the ﬁ rst place 
●      only 10% of e-mail campaigns are fully individualized in terms of 
salutation, images, timing and promotion. 
   There are many e-mail campaign management software packages, 
either standalone or integrated into more comprehensive campaign 
management or MA offerings. eGain is a leading vendor that divides the 
campaign management process into six steps (see  Figure 15.3   ).  

===== PAGE 447 =====
 
424 Customer Relationship Management
    Enterprise marketing management 
   The analysts, Gartner Inc., describe enterprise marketing management 
(EMM) thus: 
  ‘ EMM encompasses the business strategy, process automation 
and technologies required to operate a marketing department 
effectively, align resources, execute customer-centric strategies 
and improve marketing performance. It is best suited for large 
organizations with 50 or more people in marketing. This includes 
functionality for campaign management, lead management, 
MRM (marketing resource management) and analytics. However, 
EMM is more than simply the sum of  “ parts ”  (such as campaign 
management plus MRM). EMM also emphasizes the architecture 
and platform for role-based distribution of information, content, 
functionality, data and analysis for performance management. 
Critical elements of this platform include SOA (service oriented 
architecture), composite application functionality, data repository 
for structured and non-structured data, marketing data models and 
analytical toolsets ’ .
11
   The EMM market is immature in terms of both vendor offerings and 
user adoption. Companies like Aprimo, Siebel and Unica are offering 
these comprehensive suites of marketing applications. The ultimate 
purpose of EMM technology is to help marketers align their analysis, 
planning, implementation and control activities so that they can become 
more effective, efﬁ cient and accountable.  
 Figure 15.3 
      E-mail campaign 
management
process    

===== PAGE 448 =====
 
Marketing automation 425
    Event-based marketing 
  Event-based marketing occurs when an event triggers a communication 
or offer. Event-based campaigns are usually initiated by customer 
behaviours or contextual conditions. For example, a customer who uses 
a credit card less than six times in a three month period might receive an 
invitation to participate in a frequency reward programme designed to 
encourage repeated use. A bank customer who deposits $50 000 or more 
into a savings account might receive an offer of investment advice from 
a licensed ﬁ  nancial planner. Contextual conditions such as a birthday, 
registration of a child’s birth, change of address and religious festivals also 
provide opportunities for marketers to run context-speciﬁ c campaigns. 
    Internet marketing 
   Internet marketing can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
   Internet marketing is the process of creating value by building and 
maintaining online customer relationships. 
  According to Raﬁ  Mohammed and his colleagues, Internet marketing can 
be thought of as a seven-stage process ( Figure 15.4   ). Internet marketing 
applications range across these seven stages, some more comprehensively 
than others. 
  Internet marketing software enables users to perform a wide range of 
online activities designed to generate website trafﬁ c and make it proﬁ table. 
Users can do the following: develop and manage online content, create 
a pleasing online customer experience, obtain search engine listings, 
perform search engine optimization, implement keyword marketing, 
obtain customer information, customize web pages (known as dynamic 
web pages) and visitor communications, run online advertising campaigns 
using the likes of Google Adwords, manage pay-per-click programmes, 
operate afﬁ  liate marketing programmes, run e-mail campaigns and 
perform web analytics. 
    Keyword marketing 
  Keyword marketing is the practice of generating website trafﬁ  c from 
Internet users who have entered keywords into search engines such 
as Google, Yahoo!, AOL, Ask.com and Live search (formerly MSN).
A company that is interested in improving its complaint management 
processes might use the keywords  ‘ complaint-handling ’  and  ‘ ISO 10002 ’  
to search the web for useful information. The keywords will lead to 
thousands of listings. Keyword marketing software applications enable 
companies to feature early in these listings. Some keyword marketing 
involves purchasing advertising space, typically banners and text links, 
on the search results page. The other major form of keyword marketing 
is search engine optimization (SEO), which aims to get unpaid listings on 

===== PAGE 449 =====
 
426 Customer Relationship Management
the early search results pages. Google pages feature both. Advertisements 
that have been bought appear on the right hand of the search results 
page and SEO listings appear on the left. We cover SEO later in this 
chapter. 
Lead generation
   Lead generation is an important marketing objective, particularly in 
business-to-business contexts. Salespeople challenged to grow the 
numbers of customers served need to be presented with high-quality 
leads for follow-up. Marketers can deploy campaigns, events, seminars, 
webinars and other tactics to generate leads.  
    Loyalty management 
   The development of customer loyalty is a goal of many CRM 
programmes (see  Figure 15.5   ). The availability of loyalty management 
applications is a direct response to this need. Loyalty, or frequency, 
programmes are important to several constituencies; the brand owner 
who operates the programme, the member who collects and redeems 
credits, and the channel partner who transacts with the member. 
Leveraging Customer
Information Through
Technology
Designing the
Marketing Program
Crafting the
Customer
Interface
Designing the
Customer
Experience
Formulating the
Marketing Strategy
Framing the
Market
Opportunity
Evaluating
the
Marketing
Program
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Step 1
Step 7
Step 6 Step 5
 Figure 15.4 
      The seven stage 
cycle of Internet 
marketing  
12      

===== PAGE 450 =====
 
Marketing automation 427
  Many loyalty programmes are very simple, particularly when the 
brand owner has a single retail site, hands a rewards card to the customer 
and stamps the card when a purchase is made, for example  ‘ Buy 5 cups 
of coffee, get the next one free ’ . However, there are other programmes 
which are operationally and technologically complex. Consider the Nectar 
loyalty programme operating in the UK. Nectar is the UKs largest coalition 
loyalty programme, with half of all UK households having a Nectar card. 
The Loyalty Management Group (LMG) owns and operates the Nectar 
brand. Over 15 consumer brands including BP , Debenhams, Hertz, Ford 
and the Automobile Association are members of the coalition. Consumers 
acquire points with purchases and can redeem them on a number of treats, 
including spa days, movie and theatre tickets and luxurious holiday 
breaks. There are around 6000 retail outlets where the card can be used 
to earn points. Nineteen Nectar cards are swiped every second of the day. 
The technology challenge is massive and ranges across many of the issues 
in Figure 15.5 ; partner web application, member web application, contact 
centre, loyalty programme administration, transaction processing, data 
Loyalty Program Application
Create multiple loyalty
programs
Define tiers
Enroll members
Reward behavior
Create targeted promotions
Define accrual and
redemption rules
Service a customer’s request
Join Program
Keep profile up to date
Conduct  Web transactions
Enroll in loyalty promotions
Redeem rewards
Refer friends
View statements
Create service requests
Set contact preferences
Enroll members
Send transactions to the
host organization
Approve joint loyalty
promotions
Manage service request
Approve transactions
Manage products
Collaborate on servicing
the customer
Reservations Point of Sale Legacy Billing Clearinghouse
Rules Rewards Tiers Member Profiles Eligibility Transactions and Tiers EnginePromotions
Loyalty Manager Loyalty Customer Portal Loyalty Partner Portal
Enterprise Analytics and Data Integration Platform
Brand Owner Members Partner
Loyalty Program Application
 Figure 15.5        Siebel’s loyalty management software application    

===== PAGE 451 =====
 
428 Customer Relationship Management
warehousing, campaign management, account management, rewards 
administration, member analytics, partner analytics, report engines and 
multiple interfaces to different partner systems. 
    Market segmentation 
   Market segmentation is the practice of partitioning markets into 
homogenous subsets, so that each subset can be addressed as a unique 
marketing opportunity. The same principles discussed in the context of 
customer segmentation and earlier in Chapter 5 apply here.   
    Marketing analytics 
  Marketing analytics is the application of mathematical and statistical 
processes to marketing problems. Marketing analytics can be used to 
explore, describe and explain. Exploratory applications of marketing 
analytics provide insights into, and understanding about, issues and 
problems. For example, you might want to explore the issue of customer 
defection rates: do some sales territories, customer groups or products 
experience higher levels than normal? You would want to analyse 
customer-related data to get a better understanding of the issue. This 
might lead you towards deﬁ  ning a problem more precisely, identifying 
alternative courses of action and developing hypotheses to test or 
identifying key variables or relationships to explore further. A descriptive 
application of marketing analytics would involve the depiction of some 
marketing phenomenon, such as a customer group, market segment or 
product category. Descriptive applications focus on who, what, where 
and when. Some descriptive analyses are cross-sectional, others are 
longitudinal. A cross-sectional analysis involves description at a single 
point in time. Longitudinal analyses involve repeated data collection 
about the same variables over time, so that you can get a better sense of 
what changes. An explanatory application of marketing analytics would 
seek to obtain evidence of a cause–effect relationship. Analytics are used to 
explain why something has happened or to predict what might happen. 
  As noted in Chapter 13, there are three types of analytics: standard 
reports, online analytical processing (OLAP) and data mining. 
Standardized reports integrated into marketing automation may meet 
basic descriptive needs, but as the requirement for analysis grows they 
may be insufﬁ cient. OLAP offers more analytical power, in that it enables 
users to drill down into graphs and tables. Data mining offers the most 
powerful statistical routines including: 
●      descriptive statistics (frequency, mean, median, mode, variance, 
standard deviation)  
●      data reduction 
●      bivariate statistical analysis (cross-tabulation, regression, correlation)  
●      multivariate statistical analysis (multiple regression, factor analysis, 
discriminant analysis, factor analysis, cluster analysis, multi-
dimensional scaling, conjoint analysis)  
●      decision trees and neural networks 
●      data visualization that presents results in tables, charts and graphs. 

===== PAGE 452 =====
 
Marketing automation 429
   Data mining can be used to answer questions such as: 
●      What segments do my customers fall into and what are their 
characteristics?
●      Which customers are most likely to respond to my promotion?  
●      What is the lifetime value of my customer?  
●      Which customer is at risk of defection?  
●      What is the best channel to reach each customer segment? 
   Data mining can be used to produce: 
●       scores : the likelihood a customer will purchase a product  
●       predictions : how much a customer will spend in the coming year  
●       descriptions : what characteristics deﬁ ne proﬁ table customers 
●       proﬁ les : the common characteristics of each customer segment.  13
  Marketing analytics are built into the comprehensive CRM and MA suites 
available from vendors like SAP and Oracle. Specialist organizations like 
SAS and Teradata also operate in this segment. 
    Marketing optimization 
  Campaign management solutions are very popular, but most cannot handle 
a complex environment in which a ﬁ xed amount of campaign spend has 
to be distributed over many offers in many channels to many customer 
segments, with a view to achieving some overarching commercial goal 
such as maximum sales or contribution to proﬁ t. Marketing optimization 
is a mathematically-based solution to this problem. Users of marketing 
optimization software do not need to understand the complex optimization 
algorithm that underpins this application. 
   Marketing optimization software allows you to select an overall 
goal, such as sales or proﬁ  t margin maximization, and specify all of 
the constraints of your marketing campaign strategy, such as budget, 
customer contact policy (e.g. no more than three offers per customer 
per year), channels available (e.g. direct mail, e-mail, text message, 
telemarketing), minimal cell size per offer (e.g. target customer segment 
size of at least 250 persons) product-speciﬁ  c volume requirements (e.g. 
must sell 10 000 gizmos this quarter), customer segments ’  propensities to 
buy different products, and channel constraints (e.g. call centre can only 
make 200 outbound calls per week), to name but a few. The software 
then determines which customers should get which offer through which 
channel to ensure your campaign objectives are met. 
   Marketing optimization software also lets you explore any number 
of  ‘ what-if ’  scenarios by changing constraints and objectives before 
committing any marketing resources. The more advanced marketing 
optimization technology operates in real-time, allowing your website 
to present the right offer and your call centre agent to offer the right 
promotion during each customer interaction. 
  In short, marketing optimization enables marketers to extract the 
best return, however deﬁ  ned, from their campaign spend while taking 

===== PAGE 453 =====
 
430 Customer Relationship Management
account of a range of constraints such as budgets, customer segments, 
propensity to buy, contact policies, channel availability and channel 
capacity (see  Figure 15.6   ). 
 Figure 15.6        Constraints for marketing optimization  14      
    Marketing performance management (MPM)  
  Marketing performance management (MPM) software enables companies 
to measure their marketing performance through analysis and reports 
and improve outcomes over time through closed-loop marketing. Senior 
management is progressively becoming more demanding that marketers 
be accountable for their expenditure, and MPM helps marketers meet that 
expectation. MPM, which is typically focused on analysis of marketing 
tactics such as events and campaigns, is routinely built into most MA 
applications. It enables marketers to: 
●      assess the effectiveness of marketing campaigns and events by: 
         –    measuring expenditure and response rates  
         –     reporting variance between planned and achieved campaign/event 
responses and expenditure  
         –    tracking cost per lead, cost per sale and revenue per lead 

===== PAGE 454 =====
 
Marketing automation 431
●      evaluate the effectiveness of different offers, channels and creative 
executions, thereby enabling marketers to identify the most successful 
strategies and continually ﬁ ne-tune their programmes  
●      forecast ROI from current and future campaigns/events based on the 
performance of past campaigns/events. 
   Some of the more advanced MPM applications focus on more strategic 
aspects of marketing performance measurement. For example, SASs 
MPM product is able to deliver a range of reports against a number of 
KPIs, including: 
●      marketing programme metrics that report on the efﬁ  ciency and 
effectiveness of marketing tactics  
●      customer metrics that report customer satisfaction, value, churn, 
migration, etc.  
●      business/ﬁ nancial metrics (sales, proﬁ  tability, cost, etc.) that give 
executives a better insight into marketing’s ﬁ nancial impact 
●      marketing process metrics that focus on process efﬁ ciency to identify 
best practices and areas for improvement.    
   The core components of MPM software are analytics (discussed above) 
and a reporting process. Reports are typically delivered online in charts, 
tables, dashboards and text.  
    Marketing resource management 
   Marketing resource management applications consist of a range of 
automated tools that enable marketers to manage their marketing 
processes and assets more effectively, and to work at greater speed and 
with improved control. MRM toolkits may include modules for: 
●      marketing planning and budgeting 
●      new product launch 
●      marketing event calendaring 
●      event planning and registration  
●      project management 
●      campaign planning 
●      collateral production, prooﬁ ng and approval  
●      digital asset management, including brands, trademarks, logos and 
collateral material  
●      expense and budget management 
●      time management 
●      media buying 
●      procurement. 
   These tools, like other CRM applications, can be accessed on demand or 
licensed for installation on your company’s own hardware. Investment 
in MRM is more justiﬁ  ed if marketing budgets are high; if you need 
to align implementation across several branches or ofﬁ  ces; if collateral 
material is subject to frequent change; if brands, trademarks and logos 

===== PAGE 455 =====
 
432 Customer Relationship Management
are highly valued assets that need to be protected; if you run more than 
one event simultaneously; if you run more than six campaigns in a year; 
if you launch more than one new product a year; if you need to facilitate 
collaboration across departments on projects, events and campaigns.  
    Partner marketing 
   Partner marketing solutions enable companies to coordinate and work 
collaboratively with channel partners and others. Sometimes partner 
marketing is referred to as partner or trade management. Many 
companies market and sell to and through channel members, such 
as travel agents or value added resellers, or service end-users through 
specialist partners, such as third-party contact centres. Partner marketing 
solutions allow companies to synchronize the planning and execution of 
local, regional or global marketing activities by providing partners with 
controlled access to brand and marketing resources through a portal. 
  Partner marketing solutions are used to manage processes such as 
partner qualiﬁ cation and sign up, development of joint business plans and 
objectives, cooperative advertising and promotions, lead management, 
co-branding of collateral and point-of-sale materials, measuring partner 
performance, partner training, administration of marketing funds and 
specialist partner incentive schemes. 
   Microsoft Canada’s partner website describes the value of partnering 
with this message to their partners:  ‘ Your goals: Increase proﬁ  tability. 
Decrease business costs. Our goal: To provide the resources needed to 
reach yours ’  (see  Figure 15.7   ) .
 Figure 15.7 
      Microsoft Canada’s 
partner website    

===== PAGE 456 =====
 
Marketing automation 433
    Product lifecycle management 
   Many products progress through a series of stages from their initial 
market introduction to their eventual withdrawal. Product lifecycle 
management (PLM) applications aim to help marketers manage lifecycle 
stages effectively and proﬁ tably. 
  PLM software solutions facilitate collaborative intra- and extra-
enterprise engineering, product development and improved management 
of projects, product portfolios, documents and quality. PLM applications 
can provide a single source of all product-related information to use 
in the innovation, design, engineering, feasibility, launch and market 
development processes. 
   PLM applications offer a wide range of functionality, including: 
●      concept evaluation process 
●      new product development and approval process 
●      new product launch process 
●      product costing process 
●      product sourcing process 
●      product compliance process (compliance with legal, regulatory and 
voluntary standards)  
●      quality function deployment (QFD) process 
●      channel member qualiﬁ cation and recruitment process  
●      collaborative extra-enterprise product development process 
●      computer-aided design (CAD) 
●      computer-aided engineering (CAE) 
●      computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) 
●      product portfolio analysis (e.g. BCG matrix) 
●      engineering data management 
●      product delisting process 
●      workﬂ ow engineering 
●      project management and scheduling 
●      action item management 
●      document management 
●      product record. 
   Large corporations such as Oracle, SAP and IBM, and many smaller 
vendors operate in this ﬁ eld. 
    Search engine optimization 
   Search engine optimization can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 Search engine optimization (SEO) is the practice of improving the 
quantity and quality of website trafﬁ c generated by search engines. 
   Usually, the higher ranking results that appear earlier in the listings 
generate more visitors. SEO aims, therefore, to achieve high rankings, 
preferably on the ﬁ  rst or second pages. The major search engines use 
web crawlers, also known as web spiders or web robots, to browse the 

===== PAGE 457 =====
 
434 Customer Relationship Management
World Wide Web methodically. Crawlers visit websites, read the site’s 
visible content and meta tags, and visit linked links, reading content 
and meta tags there also. The crawler dumps all the data into a central 
depository, where it is indexed. The crawler returns to the sites to check 
for any changed information at periods that are determined by the 
search engine’s management. Unlike visible content, meta tags provide 
information about who created the page, how often it is updated, what 
the page is about and which keywords represent the page’s content. 
  A website’s position on a results page is determined by that search 
engine’s ranking algorithm. Algorithms are formulae composed of a set 
of weighted criteria; Google’s algorithm considers over 200 variables. 
Each search engine has its own algorithm which is a trade secret and/or 
patented.
   SEO software can help users tailor their website so that it meets the 
criteria that the search engine algorithms employ, therefore giving 
the site a high ranking. The most successful websites employ methods 
such as strategic keywords that are well matched to the content of the 
site, strategic meta tags, website structure (each page having its own 
keyword/s), search engine placement and link relevance. 
   Web masters need to understand the site’s marketing goals, the 
products that are being sold on site, the geographies being served and 
the keywords employed by users of search engines. They can then 
ensure that the right keywords and meta tags are used, the right links 
are embedded in the site and the site is submitted to the right search 
engines.
       Case 15.2   
  Filtrex implements search engine optimization      
   Filtrex (not their real name) is a commercial reseller of industrial air ﬁ lters that had invested 
in e-commerce to generate incremental sales of their products. Sales were poor and there was 
little return on the initial investment. The reseller hired an SEO consulting ﬁ  rm to develop 
their online sales channel. The goals were to increase order volume and change the product 
mix to increase sales of higher-margin items. The online air ﬁ lter market is very competitive, 
and Filtrex’s major competitors were already using a combination of search engine 
optimization (SEO) and pay-per-click (PPC) marketing to generate trafﬁ  c and sales. The 
consultant researched, developed and implemented a plan to increase Filtrex’s sales using 
a combination of creative website design and the application of advanced SEO techniques. 
Within three months the results were as follows: 
●      order numbers increased by 525% 
●      average order spend increased by over 50%  
●      number of unique visitors to the website increased by over 100%  
●      the conversion rate from website visitor to customer increased from 1.3% to over 10%. 
   Source: Braveheart Design Inc  15

===== PAGE 458 =====
 
Marketing automation 435
    Telemarketing 
   Telemarketing can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
 Telemarketing is the use of the telephone to identify and qualify 
prospects, and to sell and service the needs of customers. 
   Telemarketing takes two forms: inbound (calls from customers) and 
outbound (calls to customers). Some call centres perform a blended 
function with agents both making and receiving calls. Telemarketing 
is widely employed in both B2C and B2B environments, but is subject 
to legislative control due to its intrusive nature. For example, both the 
USA and Australia operate a  ‘ Do Not Call ’  register on which telephone 
account holders can list their numbers. With a few exceptions, such 
as charities, political organizations and research ﬁ  rms, marketers are 
not allowed to call listed numbers and penalties apply if this rule is 
breached. 
   Telemarketing software applications offer a wide range of functionality 
over landlines, mobile networks and VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol): 
●      autodialling  
●      predictive dialling 
●      automated voice-messaging 
●      contact list management 
●      agent management 
●      Do Not Call compliance 
●      screen pop with caller ID 
●      scripting, including objection response  
●      computer-aided telephone interviewing (CATI) 
●      interactive voice response (IVR). 
  Autodiallers queue a list of calls and automatically dial the next number, 
either when the current call is ﬁ  nished or the agent presses a hot key. 
Predictive diallers predict when an agent is about to conclude a call, 
and autodial the next call in anticipation. Automated voice messagers 
(or messengers) will make telephone calls automatically to a contact 
list and convey a message to them. This can be used for lead genera-
tion, debt collection, political canvassing and reminding customers 
about appointments. Telemarketing software that integrates with 
campaign management and event-based marketing applications enables 
agents to make real-time offers to customers. In-call online access to 
a searchable knowledge base enables agents to resolve issues and 
enquiries quickly.  
    Trigger marketing 
   Trigger marketing is the practice of responding to some event in a way 
that is designed to achieve some marketing goal, such as make a sale, 
identify a cross-sell opportunity, prevent negative word-of-mouth or 
promote positive word-of-mouth. The event triggers the response. 

===== PAGE 459 =====
 
436 Customer Relationship Management
As noted in the section on event-based marketing, the triggers are 
usually customer behaviours or contextual conditions. Opportunities 
for trigger marketing occur throughout the customer lifecycle. When a 
customer ﬁ rst makes a purchase you might respond with a thank you 
e-mail or letter. When a customer complains and you believe you’ve 
resolved it well, you might follow-up with a survey to ﬁ  nd out the 
complainant’s level of satisfaction with your complaints-handling 
process. When a customer is won back, having been lost to a competitor 
for a while, you might respond with a  ‘ welcome back ’  note. 
  Trigger marketing software can be trained to identify events and either 
to send an automated response, such as an e-mail, digitally-personalized 
direct mail piece or text message, or to feed the information through to a 
salesperson or customer service agent for follow-up. Trigger marketing 
ensures that the communication is relevant to the recipient, because it is 
a contextualized response to an event in the customer’s life. For example, 
when a customer is approaching their credit limit you might send an 
e-mail notifying them so they can avoid fees and charges. This would 
surely be welcomed.
       Case 15.3   
  Trigger-based marketing at HPES      
   HPES provides education and training products and services to Hewlett-Packard’s clients. 
Its offering includes partner training, virtual classrooms and a number of distance learning 
solutions, as well as accreditation programmes. In 2005 HP noticed that attaching HPES 
products and services to hardware sales enabled their customers to gain more from their 
purchase while the customer, in turn, became far more loyal and proﬁ table to HP . 
   HP created a pilot study to assess whether or not trigger-based marketing could be used to 
identify opportunities to attach HPES products and services to existing sales opportunities. 
   HP sales teams had been reluctant to sell HPES products and services, so the pilot study 
set out to identify the correct points in the sales cycle to send sales representatives an 
appropriate trigger-based communication to encourage them, and provide them with the 
information, to make incremental HPES sales. 
   The HP CRM team collaborated with an external consultancy to explore the customer and 
sales data that resided in the CRM system. The result was a bespoke set of event-based rules 
that would trigger a personalized communication from HPES to the representative. 
   The e-mail contained information to assist in the conversion of the sale, while attaching a 
relevant HPES solution. The resultant communication was tracked and the results fed back 
into the Siebel CRM system to determine sales value and ROI measure. The 12-week pilot 
generated $450 000 of incremental revenue. An extended (EMEA) pilot generated additional 
revenue of $2 million and a projected sales uplift across EMEA of $8.2 million. The pilot 
achieved a 60 per cent response rate by HP sales representatives to the personalized 
automated communication and lifted the perception of HPES within the HP sales team. 
   Source: TW Connect  16

===== PAGE 460 =====
 
Marketing automation 437
    Web analytics 
   Web analytics report the behavior of website visitors. Routine reports 
(see Figure 15.8   ) generally detail web trafﬁ c data, but may also include 
performance data from campaigns and events that involve the website, 
for example the number of click-throughs from a web link inserted in 
a campaign e-mail. Two main technologies collect data: logﬁ  le analysis 
and page tagging. Web servers record all website activity in a logﬁ  le 
which can be read by web log analysis software. Logﬁ  le analysis can 
deliver inaccurate readings of human website visitors because of 
caching and visits by web spiders from search engines. This prompted 
the introduction of page tagging as an alternative form of generating 
website data. Page tagging requires webmasters to insert some extra 
Javascript or HTML code onto web pages, so that analytics software 
can identify how many visitors originate from search engines, the 
search terms used and whether they arrived from paid-for or free 
listings.
   Three different types of statistics provide insight into a website’s 
performance: frequency counts (e.g. the number of visitors), ratios (e.g. 
page views per visit) and KPIs (key performance indicators, which can 
either be a frequency count or ratio). The Web Analytics Association has 
 Figure 15.8 
      Web analytics 
report  
18      

===== PAGE 461 =====
 
438 Customer Relationship Management
deﬁ ned a number of important terms that are used by web analytics 
vendors.17   These include: 
●       building block terms  : page, page view, visit/session, unique visitor, 
new visitor, repeat visitor, return visitor  
●       visit characterization terms : entry page, landing page, exit page, visit 
duration referrer, internal referrer, external referrer, search referrer, 
visit referrer, original referrer, click-through, click-through rate/ratio, 
page views per visit  
●       content characterization terms  : page exit ratio, single page visit, 
single page view visits, bounces, bounce rate  
●       conversion metrics terms : event, conversion. 
   Vendors of web analytics services and software make widespread use of 
the following measures: 
●       Hit : a request for a ﬁ le from the web server. This information is only 
available in log analysis. You should be aware that the number of hits 
is a misleading measure of a site’s popularity, because most web pages 
are made up of many ﬁ  les, each of which is counted as a hit as the 
page is downloaded. Most web analytics tools allow users to specify 
the ﬁ le types that count as a page (known as analyst-deﬁ nable content) 
and to request reports accordingly. 
●       Page view : the number of times a page (as deﬁ  ned by the analyst) is 
viewed.
●       Visit or session  : an interaction by an individual with a website 
consisting of one of more requests for analyst-deﬁ  nable content. A 
visit usually contains multiple hits (in log analysis) and page views.  
●       First visit or ﬁ rst session  : a visit from a user who has not made any 
previous visits.  
●       Unique visitor  : the number of individuals who make one or more 
visits to a site within a deﬁ  ned reporting period (e.g. day or month), 
making requests on the web server (log analysis) or viewing pages 
(page tagging). Because most sites do not require log-in, cookies are 
generally used instead (see below for more information on cookies).  
●       Repeat visitor  : a visitor that has made at least two visits to the 
website in a reporting period.  
●       New visitor  : a visitor that has not made any previous visits to the 
website.
●       Impression : when a page loads onto a visitor’s screen. Advertisers 
measure the reach of their online advertisements by tracking 
advertisement impressions, or the number of times their advertisements 
are loaded onto a visitor’s screen. 
●       Singleton : a visit when only a single page is viewed.  
●       Bounce rate : the percentage of visits that enter and exit on the same 
page, without browsing other pages. 
  A cookie is a small ﬁ  le of information (normally less than 1       k) that a 
website places on a visitor’s computer hard drive so that it can recognize 
the visitor on subsequent visits. There are two kinds of cookies: session 
cookies and persistent cookies. Session cookies are erased when the user 

===== PAGE 462 =====
 
Marketing automation 439
goes ofﬂ ine. Web analysis, however, relies on persistent cookies that are 
stored on the visitor’s hard drive until they expire (persistent cookies 
have expiry dates) or until the user deletes the cookie. Companies such 
as Omniture, Google Analytics and WebTrends are well-known players 
in this market. 
Workﬂ ow engineering
   Workﬂ ow engineering software is useful for designing marketing-related 
processes, such as the campaigning process (see  Figure 15.9   ), event-
based marketing process or the marketing planning process.
 Figure 15.9        Campaign workﬂ ow19  
        Summary      
   Marketing automation is the application of computerized technologies to support 
marketers and marketing management in the achievement of their work-related 
objectives. Many marketing positions can make use of marketing automation including 
marketing managers, campaign managers, market analysts, market managers, 
promotions managers, database marketers and direct marketing managers. Hardware 

===== PAGE 463 =====
 
440 Customer Relationship Management
  References  
       1.          http://www.sas.com/success/harrahs.html . Accessed 25 January 2008.      
       2.         Gartner Inc. (2007) Magic quadrant for multi-channel campaign 
management, 1Q07. 
       3.          Saunders ,    J.             ( 1994 )       Cluster analysis .        In:       G.J.     Hooley   and   M.K.     Hussey  
(eds.)       .      Quantitative methods in marketing           .  London :       Dryden Press      , 
p p . 1 3   –        2 8         .   
       4.         Courtesy of Phillip H.Sherrod ( http://www.dtreg.com ) .       
       5.          http://www.upu.int/direct_mail/en/index.shtml . Accessed 13 January 
2007. 
       6.         Euromonitor. (2005)  Direct marketing in the UK .       
       7.          http://www.dmis.co.uk/ . Accessed 13 January 2007. 
       8.          http://www.dmis.co.uk/pdfs/Response_Rates_Survey_2006.pdf .
Accessed 13 December 2007. 
       9.          http://www.e-maillabs.com/tools/e-mail-marketing-statistics.
html#e-mailusage . Accessed 13 December 2007. 
      10.          http://www.emarketer.com/Reports/All/Emarketer_2000382.
aspx?src      /H11005      report_more_info_sitesearch . Accessed 13 December 
2007.
      11.          http://mediaproducts.gartner.com/reprints/unica/article11/
article11.html . Accessed 17 December 2007. 
      12.          Mohammed ,    R.A.  ,   Fisher ,    R.J.  ,   Jaworski ,    B.J.   and   Paddison ,    G.J.        
( 2002 )        Internet marketing: building advantage in a networked economy             .  
 New York :       McGraw-Hill              .  
      13.          http://www.teradata.com/t/pdf.aspx?a      /H11005      83673 & b      /H11005      84891 . 
Accessed 17 January 2007. 
      14.         Copyright © 2008 SAS Institute Inc. All rights reserved. Reproduced 
with permission of SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA. 
and software are the key technological elements of MA. Hardware includes desktop, 
laptop and handheld devices. Software comprises both ‘ point ’  solutions that are designed 
to assist in a single area of marketing or marketing management and integrated 
solutions that offer a range of functionality. 
   Marketing automation can deliver several beneﬁ  ts, including enhanced marketing 
efﬁ ciency, greater marketing productivity, more effective marketing, enhanced 
responsiveness, improved marketing intelligence and a better customer experience. 
   Marketing automation software applications help users in asset management, 
campaign management, customer segmentation, direct mail campaign management, 
document management, e-mail campaign management, enterprise marketing 
management, event-based marketing, Internet marketing, keyword marketing, lead 
generation, loyalty management, market segmentation, marketing analytics, marketing 
optimization, marketing performance management, marketing resource management, 
partner marketing, product lifecycle management, search engine optimization, 
telemarketing, trigger marketing, web analytics and workﬂ ow engineering.         

===== PAGE 464 =====
 
Marketing automation 441
      15.         Braveheart Design Inc.  http://www.braveheartdesign.com/casestudies/
ﬁ lters.htm . Accessed 17 December 2007. 
      16.         TW Connect Ltd.  http://www.twconnect.co.uk/upload/ﬁ le/158/
79244/FILENAME/HP_Education.pdf . Accessed 26 January 2008. 
      17.          http://www.webanalyticsassociation.org/attachments/committees/5/
WAA-Standards-Analytics-Definitions-Volume-I-20070816.pdf . 
Accessed 18 December 2007. 
      18.          http://www.customfitonline.com/solutions/web-analytics.htm . 
Accessed 18 December 2007. Used with permission. 
      19.         Copyright © 2008 SAS Institute Inc. All rights reserved. Reproduced 
with permission of SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA. 

===== PAGE 465 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 466 =====
 
    Service automation  
 Chapter 16 

===== PAGE 467 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 468 =====
 
           Chapter objectives      
   By the end of this chapter you will understand: 
    1.   what is meant by customer service  
    2.   what is meant by service automation (SA)  
    3.   the beneﬁ ts that SA can deliver to organizations  
    4.   the functionality available within SA software.         
    Introduction 
   This is the last of three chapters that look at CRM technologies. This 
chapter is about the technologies used in customer service departments 
or by service staff. The preceding two chapters reviewed sales-force 
automation and marketing automation. This chapter starts by deﬁ  ning 
customer service and service automation (SA) before describing some of 
the functionality that is available in SA software.  
    What is customer service? 
  As customers we all understand and appreciate when we have 
experienced excellent customer service. The people who serve us are 
friendly, responsive, empathetic and do the right things well, whether 
it is answering a question, offering advice or accepting the return of 
faulty merchandise. Equally we can all recognize poor customer service, 
delivered by surly, unapproachable, dogmatic, inﬂ  exible staff working 
with poor information and hampered by outdated technology. 
  Customer service has been a necessary preoccupation of service 
organizations because they have understood that customers are 
responsive to the quality of the service they experience. However, the 
quality of customer service is just as important for agriculturalists, miners 
and goods manufacturers. This is particularly so when there is product 
parity and customers are unable to discern meaningful differences 
between alternative suppliers or brands. For most customers one brand 
of carpet is much like another. Carpet manufacturers and retailers ﬁ  nd 
it hard to differentiate in terms of meaningful product-related variables; 
they therefore use service-related variables such as prepurchase advice, 
measurement, delivery, removal of old ﬂ oor coverings and ﬁ tting of new 
carpet, to win business from customers. 
  Customer service standards can be assessed by customers when a 
service is being performed, as well as after the service has been delivered. 
The service experience, as perceived from the dentist’s chair during 

===== PAGE 469 =====
 
446 Customer Relationship Management
service delivery, might be very different from the assessment a few days 
later. 
   Customer service can be experienced at any stage of the customer 
activity cycle: before, during or after purchase.  1   In a B2C context the 
purchaser of a laptop computer might call a number of retailers for 
advice prior to selecting a store to visit; while in the store he or she 
might ask the store clerk to demonstrate a number of shortlisted 
machines; after the purchase has been made he or she might need to call 
the manufacturer’s helpdesk for advice on how to obtain service under 
warranty. In a B2B context a company purchasing new manufacturing 
equipment might need prepurchase engineering advice, assistance 
during purchase with removal of existing equipment and postpurchase 
assistance with operator training. 
   In Chapter 7 you read about two important models of service quality 
that are used by companies to understand and satisfy customers ’  service 
expectations. The Nordic model, originated by Christian Grönroos and 
developed by others, identiﬁ  es three components of service quality: 
technical, functional and reputational.  
2   Technical quality can be thought 
of as the ‘ what ’  of service quality. Was the dishwasher water leak ﬁ  xed 
by the technician? Functional quality can be thought of as the ‘ how ’  of 
service quality. Did the technician turn up on time and act courteously? 
Reputational quality is not only a product of technical and functional 
quality, in that reputation derives from performance. Reputation can also 
predispose customers towards forming particular perceptions of quality, 
for better or worse. The SERVQUAL model, developed by A.  ‘ Parsu ’
Parasuraman and colleagues in North America, claims there are ﬁ ve core 
components of service quality: reliability, assurance, tangibles, empathy 
and responsiveness.  
3
  Customers who receive service from technology-enabled manufacturers 
or service providers, such as those with CRM systems in place, experience 
a further form of quality that can be thought of as integrative quality. 
Integrative quality is determined by the way the various elements of 
the product and service delivery system work together. High integrative 
quality means that the processes, people and technology complement 
each other, working efﬁ  ciently and effectively to deliver excellent 
customer service. Good people either working with ill-deﬁ ned processes 
or supported by dated technologies ﬁ  nd it very difﬁ  cult to deliver 
excellent customer service. 
   Fred Wiersema has researched the attributes that companies renowned 
for excellent customer service have in common. He identiﬁ  es six 
common attributes, all of which are important from a CRM perspective.  
4
    1.     Customer service is pervasive. It is everyone’s responsibility; it is 
neither delegated nor relegated to a single department or function.  
    2.     Their operations run smoothly with minimal product and service 
defect rates, allowing them to focus on pleasing customers.  
    3.     They are always looking for ways to improve. 
    4.     Customer service lies at the heart of the value proposition. Customer 
service is the main selling point.  
    5.     They build personal relationships with customers. 

===== PAGE 470 =====
 
Service automation 447
    6.     They employ the latest IT to allow their customers to interact with 
them more conveniently; to develop a profound understanding of 
what customers need and want; to track activities and processes that 
inﬂ uence customer experience. 
   From a CRM perspective these are all important, but the last three in 
particular. Customer service is the key element of these companies ’  value 
propositions and is an important component of strategic CRM. They 
understand that customers are responsive to excellent customer service, 
whatever the basic product or service they create. They also build 
personal relationships with customers. They understand the needs and 
requirements of customers at an individual level, and they recognize and 
respond to events in the customer’s life using analytical CRM. Finally, 
they employ the latest information technology, which allows customers 
to interact with them whenever they want through multiple channels, an 
important component of operational CRM. IT also enables them to learn 
about and respond to customer requirements and to track interactions 
and processes that connect them to their customers.  
    What is service automation? 
   The term service automation (SA) can be deﬁ ned as follows: 
   Service automation is the application of computerized technologies to 
support service staff and management in the achievement of their work-
related objectives. 
  According to the International Customer Service Association, 
customer service departments are responsible for managing inbound 
call centre operations, complaint handling and resolution, order entry 
and processing, providing ﬁ eld sales support, managing outbound call 
centre operations, and acting as liaison to other departments. 
5   It is in 
these and related activities that SA is deployed. 
   Service automation is used in ﬁ ve major contexts: 
●      contact centres 
●      call centres 
●      helpdesks  
●      ﬁ eld service
●     web self-service.
   Contact centres are conﬁ gured to communicate with customers across 
multiple channels, including voice telephony, mail, e-mail, SMS, instant 
messaging, web collaboration and fax. Service agents need to be able 
to access an entire communication history, regardless of channel, when 
communicating with customers about service issues. Channel integration 
is, therefore, an important feature of contact centre technologies. 
Technologies for inbound and outbound customer communication, 
including e-mail response management systems, are widely deployed 
in contact centre contexts. Contact centre staff may be called on to 

===== PAGE 471 =====
 
448 Customer Relationship Management
handle inbound service-related calls, participate in outbound marketing 
campaigns, respond to e-mail and engage in web chat. 
  Call centres are generally dedicated to voice telephony communications, 
whether through a public switched telephone network, cell phone 
network or VoIP . Agents operating in call centres require a different skill-
set from those operating in multichannel contact centres. There is a less 
compelling need for excellent literacy skills such as reading and writing; 
they do, however, need excellent listening and responding skills. 
  Helpdesks are usually associated with IT environments where assistance 
is offered to IT users. SA applications, such as case management, job 
management and service level management, are used in this setting. 
Helpdesk solutions often comply with, and support, third-party standards 
such as information technology infrastructure library (ITIL) and the 
information technology service management (ITSM) reference model. 
  Field service is widespread in both B2C and B2B environments. Service 
engineers for white goods, such as dishwashers and washing machines, or 
brown goods, such as televisions and hi-ﬁ  installations, visit consumers ’
homes to install, maintain or repair products. In the B2B context, 
technicians and engineers visit factories, depots, warehouses, workshops, 
ofﬁ ces and other workplaces before, during and after purchase to help 
customers specify, select, procure, install, service and decommission a wide 
range of machines and systems, ranging from photocopiers, to forklifts, to 
IT infrastructure. Service automation applied to ﬁ  eld service operations 
involves technologies such as job management, scheduling, mapping and 
spare parts management. Unlike their ofﬁ ce-bound colleagues, ﬁ eld service 
staff needs access to SA applications and data on their laptops, handheld 
devices, smart phones and cell phones. Technology ﬁ rms such as Oracle, 
SAP , Corrigo, ServicePower, Ventyx, Astea, TOA and @Road all provide 
speciﬁ c software applications for ﬁ eld service technicians. 
 Many companies now offer web-based self-service to customers. 
Customers can place orders, pay, track service issues, or perform service 
diagnostics online at any time of day or night. 
   In addition to engineers and technicians, others may also be involved 
in providing customer service aided by service automation: customer 
service agents, sales representatives, sales administration and marketers, 
for example. Customer-centric organizations may take the view that 
all employees should be able to deliver excellent customer service, 
including the ability to handle an enquiry, create a trouble-ticket, or 
resolve a complaint. 
   Infrastructure, data, devices and software are the key technological 
elements of service automation. Infrastructure plays an important role 
in enabling service to be delivered. When service is delivered through a 
central call centre or contact centre, in a multichannel environment, there 
needs to be close integration between various communication systems 
including telephony, e-mail and web. A customer may browse the web 
to ﬁ nd out how to obtain service and then communicate the service 
request by voice telephony into a call centre. However, the customer 
may expect to receive the initial notiﬁ  cation of service appointment 
time by e-mail and any change to that time by text message. Call centres 
need integration between the software on the customer service agent’s 

===== PAGE 472 =====
 
Service automation 449
desktop and the automated call distributor (ACD) or switch hardware, 
so that calls are prioritized and routed appropriately. 
  Access to the right customer-related data, to enable the service agent to 
identify and ﬁ x the issue promptly, is critical to the delivery of responsive 
customer service. Customer-related data includes both structured data, 
such as contact history, account balances and agreed service levels, 
and unstructured data, such as e-mails and agent notes on telephone 
conversations. Being able to draw on a searchable database of service issues 
and ﬁ xes allows the agent to resolve problems quickly and completely. 
   Where service is delivered by a distributed workforce, smaller, lighter, 
devices such as laptops, Windows-enabled handheld devices and smart 
phones or cell phones such as Blackberries, tend to be employed; these 
are typically not found in call and contact centres. Synchronization is also 
an issue for a distributed service team. Periodic synchronization with 
the central CRM database enables service engineers and others to ensure 
that they are fully apprised of their daily scheduled appointments. In 
addition it is important for service engineers to have the most current 
service manuals in their laptops.  
    Beneﬁ ts from service 
automation
   Service automation has an important role to play in allowing companies 
to deliver excellent customer service. SA can deliver several beneﬁ  ts, 
including the following: 
●       Enhanced service effectiveness  : service requests can be completed 
more quickly to the customer’s satisfaction by ensuring that requests 
are handled at the ﬁ rst point of contact, or routed to the right service 
engineer or customer service agent, who is able to draw on an up to 
date knowledge base to resolve the issue.  
●       Greater service productivity  : call and contact centre management 
systems ensure that the optimal numbers of agents are scheduled and 
that their time is used productively. Field service applications ensure 
that workload is equitably and optimally distributed.  
●       Improved customer experience  : agents have full visibility into the 
customer history and service request and can ensure that service 
delivery is appropriate to customer status or agreed service levels. 
       Case 16.1   
  Service automation at ICEE      
  The ICEE Company is a division of J & J Snack Foods and is located in Ontario, California. Its 
ﬂ agship product is the ICEE, a ﬂ  avoured frozen ice beverage that is carbonated and comes in 

===== PAGE 473 =====
 
450 Customer Relationship Management
various ﬂ avours. ICEE also produces other slushies, beverages and ice pops under both the 
ICEE and Slush Puppie brands. The company serves over 300 million Icees per year. 
   ICEE employs 800 people with 400 ﬁ  eld technicians who service 30 000 ICEE machines 
across the US. In the year 2000 ICEE began to scrutinize the inefﬁ  ciencies they found in 
the ICEE machine repair process. The company’s existing process was very inefﬁ  cient and 
error-prone. The challenges were to transform the inefﬁ  cient paper-based machine repair 
processes, shorten billing cycles, capture accurate inventory and customer data electronically 
and transmit in real-time, respond to customer requests more quickly, eliminate an 
ineffective paper-based parts inventory system and reallocate despatchers time. 
  After researching several alternatives, ICEE concluded that a real-time wireless data solution 
would provide them with many more beneﬁ  ts than a batch system, which would require 
technicians to connect to a landline and synchronize data at the beginning and end of each day. 
The ﬁ nal solution comprised a wireless handheld device from Symbol Technologies, coupled 
with Countermind’s Mobile Intelligence Field Service Automation Solution, which was tailored 
to reﬂ ect ICEE’s business process. This application runs on AT & T’s GSM/GPRS network. 
  Now, all repair data is captured electronically on handheld devices. Billing cycles are reduced 
because manual data entry is eliminated. Complete job information is available to ﬁ  eld 
technicians in real-time. Field technicians can complete more work orders in a day, improving 
productivity and customer satisfaction. Parts inventory is managed more effectively and 
accurately. 
   Source: AT & T  6
   Activity management  Mapping and driving directions 
   Agent management  Outbound communications management 
   Case assignment  Queuing and routing 
   Case management  Scheduling 
   Contract management  Scripting 
   Customer self-service  Service analytics 
   E-mail response management  Service level management 
   Escalation  Spare parts management 
   Inbound communications management  Web collaboration 
   Invoicing  Workﬂ  ow engineering 
   Job management 
Table 16.1    
   Functionality 
offered by service 
automation
software  
    Software applications for 
service
   Service automation applications offer a range of functionality, as listed 
in  Table 16.1   . Note that different SA vendors use the terms issue, case, 

===== PAGE 474 =====
 
Service automation 451
incident, trouble ticket and service request synonymously to describe 
the different customer problems that service agents are called on to 
ﬁ x. The table lists both macro-software application solutions that offer 
a wide range of functionality and micro-software application solutions 
that offer a narrow range of functionality. The macro solutions, such as 
case management, deliver much of the functionality present in the micro 
solutions. In the next few paragraphs, we’ll describe this functionality in 
more detail. 
    Activity management 
   This enables service staff to review their workload, to-do list and 
priorities as directed by their manager or scheduler, and to report back 
on progress and issue resolution. Some applications allow activities to be 
updated in real-time by despatchers and routed to the technician, so that 
work can be reprioritized. Alerts can be set so that appointments are not 
missed or to notify agents and their managers that issues are unresolved 
or service levels are about to be, or have been, violated. The despatch 
process typically uses wireless messaging, requiring the technician 
to carry an ‘always-on’ PDA or cell-phone, and a laptop with service 
manuals and diagnostic tools.  
    Agent management 
  Agent management is a high priority for call and contact centre managers. 
Managers want to employ the lowest number of staff compatible with 
the desired level of customer service. Too few agents and customers will 
be dissatisﬁ ed with wait-times; too many agents and payroll costs will 
be unnecessarily high. Customers and managers both want issues to be 
resolved quickly by agents. Technologies that contribute to this outcome 
include queuing, scripting and knowledge management, which are 
discussed elsewhere. Agent managers are faced with the challenge of 
managing globally dispersed service agents, employed both inhouse and 
outsourced, operating in different times zones, languages and currencies. 
Dashboards provide managers with visibility into the performance of 
both contact centres and individual agents. Performance data include 
volumes received (e.g. calls, e-mails), average queuing time, percentage 
handled, average speed of answer (measured in seconds and/or rings), 
average handle time and abandon rates. 
    Case assignment 
   Case assignment applications ensure that each enquiry or issue gets 
routed to the right agent or technician for resolution. Customer service 
agents might, for example, be organized according to language skills. 
When an e-mail enquiry is received in Urdu it is assigned to the agent 
competent in that language. Field technicians might be organized 
according to product category. When a service request is received to ﬁ  x 
a printer, it is assigned to a technician who is knowledgeable about that 
product class, not to a more expensive photocopier expert.  

===== PAGE 475 =====
 
452 Customer Relationship Management
   Case management 
  Case management covers the full cycle of activities involved, from 
receiving initial notiﬁ cation of a matter of concern to a customer to its ﬁ nal 
resolution and the case ﬁ le being closed. Case management is also known 
as incident management and issue management. Case management 
processes are typically designed using workﬂ  ow applications within SA 
software. Workﬂ ow depicts the activities that must be performed, the 
sequence in which they occur and sometimes includes the standards to 
which the activities must comply. Cases, incidents or issues are initiated 
by the creation of a trouble ticket. Customers may be allowed to do this by 
web form or by e-mailing or calling a service or contact centre. The ticket is 
assigned to a service engineer. The software automatically communicates 
with the customer at different trigger events, such as scheduling of 
appointments, or follow-up after the case is closed. Case management 
software is often associated with a service knowledge base that enables 
technicians to diagnose and ﬁ x problems quickly. 
 Figure 16.1        Trouble-ticket screenshot  7      
    Contract management 
   Contract management functionality enables service engineers and 
managers to create, track, progress, accelerate, monitor and control 
service contracts with customers. Many companies now sell extended 

===== PAGE 476 =====
 
Service automation 453
service contracts to customers when warranty periods have expired. 
Some industries, such as ofﬁ  ce photocopier suppliers, rely on extended 
service contracts as the primary proﬁ t stream, selling machines at a loss 
and recouping the cost over several years of service.  
    Customer self-service 
  Customer self-service is an attractive option for companies because it 
transfers the responsibility and cost of service to the customer. Customers 
who self-serve are much less likely to place demands on contact centre, 
call centre, helpdesk or ﬁ eld service staff. Customers are typically more 
competent at self-serving when transactions are involved (e.g. online 
banking or music downloads). However, they are less competent when 
problem resolution is concerned. In some sectors, it is commonplace to 
be able to place orders online and track the progress of the order. For 
example, customers can track and trace the location of packages they 
have sent or are expecting to receive. The website, www.track-trace.com, 
serves as a central track and trace clearing house for couriers DHL, UPS, 
TNT, FedEx and dozens of other market participants. Extranet-enabled 
portals are the technology of choice for companies wanting to enable 
customers to self-serve. Customers can transact online, place orders, pay 
accounts and check order and shipment progress on any day and at any 
time. Companies that place their knowledge base, or parts thereof, online 
also facilitate problem resolution by customers. Customers can browse 
for answers to their queries or solutions to their problems. In the event 
that this is unsuccessful, companies can allow customers to use an online 
web form to create a case or an issue for the company to follow-up and 
resolve or offer web collaboration (see below). 
    E-mail response management 
  E-mail response management systems (ERMS) are an increasingly 
important part of the service automation landscape. E-mail is widely 
used for both interpersonal and intercompany communications. IDC, the 
technology analyst, reported that nearly 100 billion e-mail messages were 
sent daily in 2007. E-mail volumes have been growing for many years but 
it is expected that growth rates will slow as instant messaging and low 
cost or free VoIP calls become more common, particularly among young 
adults.
8   ERMS are not only useful for handling inbound e-mails, but also 
for delivering outbound e-mails and SMS messages. Company collateral, 
packaging and websites often list e-mail addresses for individuals and 
departments. As many as 90 per cent of companies ’  websites list e-mail 
contacts for customer support. 9   In addition, many companies have 
generic e-mail addresses such as info@, sales@ and support@. Customers 
increasingly expect companies to offer an e-mail communication channel, 
not just for general communications but speciﬁ  cally for service-related 
issues. They also expect companies to respond promptly to incoming 
e-mails. One survey indicates room for improvement in this regard, 
with 37 per cent of Fortune 100 companies failing completely to respond 
to e-mails. 
10   As individuals, many of us use Outlook or Notes for 

===== PAGE 477 =====
 
454 Customer Relationship Management
e-mail. While these may be suitable for small volumes of e-mail, they lack 
functionality that is useful for higher volume, business-related purposes, 
such as queuing, routing, intelligent autoresponders, personalization, 
knowledge-based integration, productivity tools such as templates and 
multi-language spell checkers, and e-mail analytics. These are typically 
part of commercial ERMS. 
  Effective deployment of an ERMS is often accompanied by the 
publication of service levels. Published service levels such as ‘ We 
respond to all e-mails within 24 hours ’  help to manage customers ’  service 
expectations and motivate employees to act accordingly. Service levels can 
vary between customer segments and product categories. For example, 
service issues raised by more valued customers, or related to newly 
launched products, might receive a faster response. 
   ERMS are designed up to manage the reception, interpretation, 
routing, response and storage of incoming e-mail securely and 
effectively. Rather than using generic e-mail boxes, many companies 
have opted to receive customer service requests using preconﬁ  gured 
web forms. These require customers to select responses to a number of 
predetermined questions using dropdown menus, check boxes and radio 
buttons. Space may also be provided for customers to key in free text. 
Log-in data or cookies allow companies to respond to web form service 
requests according to customer-related metrics, such as customer value 
and purchase history. Where companies choose to receive customer 
e-mails into generic e-mail boxes, there needs to be a manual or automated 
system for reading and responding to them, routing them to responsible 
individuals where necessary. First generation automated readers typically 
are trained to recognize keywords and respond accordingly. Second 
generation readers recognize patterns across the entire e-mail text rather 
than simply recognizing keywords. Pattern recognition has the added 
advantage of being able to detect the emotional tone of an e-mail, so that a 
particularly angry customer might be identiﬁ ed and receive an immediate 
response. ERMS also have specialized spam recognition and ﬁ  ltering 
features and antivirus tools. It is estimated that about 40 per cent of 
e-mails are spam. 
11
  Routing rules in ERMS allow incoming e-mails to be routed into 
queues for particular agents or departments. Most ERMS allow clients 
to conﬁ gure routing rules using an administrative user interface that can 
only be accessed by authorized administrators. Routing rules can push 
e-mails to particular queues based on agent workload, agent language 
skills, agent product knowledge, subject matter expertise, customer value 
or other variables. This speeds up resolution times and helps meet service 
levels. Routing also allows more important service requests, perhaps 
from more valued customers, to be escalated for resolution by higher 
authorities.
   The response time and response content are two important issues that 
customers consider in assessing service quality. ERMS can be set up to 
issue an immediate, personalized acknowledgment and case (tracking) 
number on receipt of a service-related e-mail. These autoresponses 
can also be used to set out the service promise, for example, that you 
will resolve the issue within seven days. ERMS can also be used to 

===== PAGE 478 =====
 
Service automation 455
keep the customer informed of progress in the resolution of the service 
request. 
   From the company’s point of view, a number of service metrics shed 
light on the effectiveness of their e-mail management processes: numbers 
of e-mails in queues, average response time, service level compliance 
and agent productivity. From a service delivery perspective the most 
important measure is customer satisfaction with response time and 
content.
 Escalation 
  Escalation ensures that issues get escalated according to internally 
determined rules. Higher levels of authority typically have greater 
discretion to resolve issues. For example, a frontline customer service 
agent might be required to escalate issues that have a potentially high 
cost or reputational consequence to higher levels of management. 
Workﬂ ow rules can be applied to determine escalation levels and actions 
appropriate to any given circumstances. A health insurance specialist 
escalates issues based on their cost implications as follows:
   Level Limit
   Customer service agent /H11021 $50 
   Team leader /H11021 $100 
   Business unit manager /H11022 $500 
   Executive manager /H11022 $2000 
  Agents in the frontline are trained to recognize issues that fall outside 
of the normal rules for health insurance provision and to escalate those 
issues accordingly.  
    Inbound communications management (ICM) 
   Inbound communications management (ICM) applications are widely 
deployed in contact centre contexts. The technology allows companies 
to receive, route, queue and distribute incoming communications from 
any channel (voice telephony, e-mail, fax, instant message, SMS, fax or 
web form) to agents in any location including a contact centre, in the 
ﬁ eld or at home. A uniﬁ  ed queue, issue/content recognition, intelligent 
routing and knowledge-base integration allow agents to deliver a 
consistent customer experience and to respond effectively to service 
requests, whatever the communication channel. Additional technologies 
that support service delivery in this multichannel environment include 
computer telephony integration (CTI), interactive voice response (IVR), 
scripting, call recording, problem diagnostics and service analytics. As 
with other CRM applications, ICM is available on demand (hosted) or 
on premise (installed on the user’s hardware). According to Gartner 
Inc.’s analysis of 16 vendors ’  solutions, Oracle is the leader in providing 
contact centre management solutions, with Microsoft and salesforce.com 
challenging. Other technology ﬁ  rms such as Amdocs, SAP , Chordiant, 
RightNow and Pegasystems also operate in this space.  
12

===== PAGE 479 =====
 
456 Customer Relationship Management
    Invoicing 
   Invoicing is a useful application for service technicians who are called 
to site to provide out of warranty service. Having completed the job 
to the customer’s satisfaction and captured the customer’s signature 
electronically, the invoice can be raised on the spot covering ﬁ  xed 
charges, labour and parts, improving cashﬂ  ow and reducing customer 
service issues relating to invoicing errors.   
   Job management 
   Job management applications offer a range of functionality that is useful 
to service managers and technicians when planning and performing ﬁ eld 
service repairs, preventive maintenance, meter readings, inspections, 
       Case 16.2   
  Service centre automation at Coca Cola      
   Coca Cola Bottling Unit (CCBU), a soft drinks manufacturer and distributor, is based in 
Lambeg, Northern Ireland. The company employs over 400 people and has 14 000 customers. 
The service support team deals with a range of incoming calls that include complaints, 
orders, enquiries, delivery and pricing. 
   The decision to install a single customer service touchpoint dates back to 1996 when a 
customer satisfaction survey indicated that although customers generally felt they were 
receiving good service, they wanted a single contact point for customer service. 
   CCBUs lack of a single contact point meant that inbound calls were not logged in a uniform 
way. This in turn hindered analysis of call content and frequency and lead to variance in the 
quality and consistency of responses to service queries. In addition, the company had no 
way of tracking if the advice given had resolved the problem. 
   The company resolved these problems by introducing a single touchpoint for all service 
issues and implementing the service automation product, HEAT. The support centre is split 
between customer services and customer complaints. HEAT is used to monitor product 
codes found on packaging and products; when the support team ﬁ  nds three or more 
complaints that refer to any of these items then an alert message is sent direct to the incident 
team who investigate the situation. 
   CCBU installed service level agreements (SLAs), scripted responses and screen customization 
to ensure high levels of customer service. CCBUs implementation of SLAs means that if a 
call has not been resolved within a speciﬁ  ed period of time it is automatically escalated. 
The system ensures all calls are logged and are therefore measurable. The customer service 
team underwent intensive training. Every new employee is trained in ﬁ  rst level response 
across the board, which enables everyone within the company to close standard queries and 
improve the service customers receive. 
   Source: FrontRange Solutions UK  13

===== PAGE 480 =====
 
Service automation 457
installations, upgrades and other service tasks. Functionality ranges 
over cost estimation, quotation generation, creation of trouble tickets, 
job planning, travel time and distance calculation, job clustering (to 
reduce travel time), calendaring, scheduling, spare parts management, 
job progress tracking, invoicing, service level management, technician 
despatch, time management and product conﬁ guration (see  Figure 16.2   ). 
   Solutions that provide mapping and driving directions are very useful 
for service engineers who need to visit customers ’  homes or business 
premises. Taking into account the engineer’s point of origin, service 
locations, job priorities, service level agreements and other variables, 
mapping solutions can minimize travel times and distances to ensure 
that service tasks are performed optimally. 
    Outbound communications management 
   Outbound communications management software applications are 
used in a service environment to acknowledge service requests, make 
and conﬁ rm service appointments, advise on the progress of a service 
task, invoice for out of warranty service and follow-up after service 
to ensure that the customer is satisﬁ  ed. Customer preferences can 
be considered when selecting the communication medium, whether 
 Figure 16.2        Job management screenshot    

===== PAGE 481 =====
 
458 Customer Relationship Management
telephone, e-mail or SMS. The technology ﬁ  rm, KANA, provides 
outbound communications management applications, and comments 
that it is possible to convert successful service interactions into up-sell 
and cross-sell opportunities with follow-up outbound e-mails and SMS 
messages.14
    Queuing and routing 
   Queuing and routing applications allow issues to be routed to agents 
with particular expertise and positioned in that agent’s queue according 
to some criterion. Routing is usually determined by case assignment 
rules (see above) and position in the queue is determined by customer 
value or some other metric. The objective of queuing and routing is to 
ensure that every service issue is presented to the most appropriate 
agent for handling and resolution.  
    Scheduling 
   This involves planning and organizing a service technician’s activity 
plan for a day, a week or any other period. A technician’s schedule 
contains details on the customer, location, time, product and issue. Some 
scheduling applications take into account a range of considerations to 
ensure that the right technician is sent to service the customer. These 
include travel time and distance, technician availability, technician skills, 
customer access hours, service level agreement, availability of spare parts 
and the technician’s hourly rates of pay. Optimization engines allow 
schedules to be changed as new service tickets are created, priorities 
change and technicians or parts become (un)available. Optimization 
reduces service costs while maintaining service performance levels. 
Scheduled tasks can be released in batches for days or weeks or drip-fed 
to technicians for the coming few hours (see  Figure 16.3   ) .
    Scripting 
   Scripting enables customer service agents to converse intelligently with 
customers to diagnose and resolve problems, even though they may 
be untrained as technicians. Scripts can be designed so that they ﬂ  ex 
dynamically according to customer response. Scripts also reduce agent 
training time.  
   Service analytics 
   Service analytics provide managers with information on how effectively 
and efﬁ ciently customer service generally, and individual agents or 
technicians speciﬁ cally, are operating. Important metrics for managers 
of ﬁ eld service operations include, for example, technician utilization, 
parts inventory, travel time, ﬁ  rst time ﬁ  x rate (FTFR), mean time to 
resolve (MMTR) and job backlog. FTFR tells managers how many 
cases were resolved at the technician’s ﬁ  rst call. MMTR measures time 
elapsed between notiﬁ cation of the service request to the company and 

===== PAGE 482 =====
 
Service automation 459
 Figure 16.3 
      Task schedule 
delivered to a 
Pocket PC  
15      
its ﬁ nal resolution. With this information managers can obtain new 
resources, reassign staff, offer training, or recalibrate key performance 
indicators to enhance service delivery. Many SA applications incorporate 
embedded analytics that produce standard reports and enable OLAP to 
be performed. 
    Service level management 
  Service level management applications allow managers to control the 
level of service that is offered to customers, and technicians to deliver 
the agreed level of service. As introduced in Chapter 7, a service level 
agreement is a contractual commitment between a service provider and 
a customer that speciﬁ es the mutual responsibilities of both parties with 
respect to the services that will be provided and the standards at which 
they will be performed. Service levels can be agreed for a number of 
variables including availability (the percentage of time that the service 
is available over an agreed time period), usage (the number of service 
users that can be served simultaneously) and responsiveness (the speed 
with which a demand for service is fulﬁ  lled). Service levels, however, 
are not always subject to negotiation with customers. Many companies 
simply offered tiered levels of service to customers based on some metric 
of their own choice, typically customer value as measured by customer 
proﬁ tability or sales. Technicians that understand the entitlements 
of customers can service to the speciﬁ  ed limit and even up-sell the 
customer to a higher level of service. Establishing service levels can also 

===== PAGE 483 =====
 
460 Customer Relationship Management
 Figure 16.4 
      Contact centre telephony dashboard with meters showing key information  16      
help human resource management measure people’s performance and 
compute incentives for meeting service level goals. 
    Spare parts management 
  Spare parts management is an important application for ﬁ eld technicians. 
They can see what parts they have with them on the road, check the 
inventory levels held by other technicians and at regional and central 
warehouses, order new parts, transfer parts from colleagues, manage 
excess and defective parts, and check on the progress of orders, thereby 
ensuring that when they turn up at a job they are properly equipped. 
Managers can use this application to ensure that appropriate levels 
of parts inventory are maintained. Too few parts and jobs cannot be 
completed; too many and inventory costs are unnecessarily high. 
    Web collaboration 
   Web collaboration between customer and service agent is enabled by 
technologies that use instant messaging (web chat ‘request call back’ 

===== PAGE 484 =====
 
Service automation 461
        Summary      
   Service automation is the application of computerized technologies to support service 
managers and customer service agents in contact and call centres, and helpdesk staff 
and mobile service staff operating in the ﬁ  eld, to achieve their work-related objectives. 
Companies and their customers can experience three main beneﬁ  ts from service 
automation: enhanced service effectiveness, greater service productivity and improved 
customer experience. Service automation applications offer a range of functionality 
to service managers and technicians: activity management, agent management, case 
assignment, case management, contract management, customer self-service, e-mail 
response management, escalation, inbound communications management, invoicing, job 
management, mapping and driving directions, outbound communications management, 
queuing and routing, scripting, scheduling, service analytics, service level management, 
spare parts management, web collaboration and workﬂ ow engineering.        
or ‘click to talk’) or allow both parties to co-browse web pages. This 
allows the agent to help the customer to resolve the issue in real-time. 
Customer service agents can collaborate with a number of customers 
simultaneously or can prioritize based on customer value or some 
other metric. Transcripts of the chat can be retained and attached to the 
customer ﬁ le. Web collaboration is often used as an escalation option 
for customers who cannot ﬁ  nd a solution to their issue through a self-
service portal. Web collaboration may reduce online abandonment rates, 
increase problem resolution and customer satisfaction, and provide up-
sell and cross-sell opportunities. In countries with excellent broadband 
services (e.g. South Korea) web chat with text, voice and even web-cam 
is being used for problem-resolution, up-sell and cross-sell.  
    Workﬂ ow engineering 
   Workﬂ ow engineering software is useful for designing service-related 
processes, such as problem diagnosis and issue escalation. Workﬂ  ow for 
ﬁ eld service operations will deﬁ  ne how service requests are validated, 
how service tickets are issued, how tickets are allocated, how problems 
will be diagnosed, how parts will be ordered, how problems will be 
ﬁ xed, how customers will be invoiced and so on.
  References  
       1.          Vandermerwe ,    S.                ( 1993 )        Jumping into the customer activity cycle: a 
new role for customer services in the 1990s .  Columbia Journal of World 
Business       ,  Vol. 28       ( Summer, 2 )       , pp.  46  –       66        .  
       2.          Grönroos ,    C.                ( 1984 )        A service quality model and its marketing 
implications .            European Journal of Marketing       ,  Vol. 18         , pp.  36  –       44        .  

===== PAGE 485 =====
 
462 Customer Relationship Management
       3.         Parasuraman, A. Zeithaml, V .A. Berry, L.L. A conceptual model of 
service quality and its implications for future research.  Journal of 
Marketing , Vol. 49, Fall, pp. 41–50; Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V .A. 
and Berry, L.L. (1988) SERVQUAL: a multiple-item scale for 
measuring consumers ’  perceptions of service quality.  Journal of 
Retailing , Vol. 64(1), pp. 22–37; Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V .A. and 
Berry, L.L. (1991) Reﬁ  nement and reassessment of the SERVQUAL 
scale. Journal of Retailing  , Vol. 64, pp. 12–40; Parasuraman, A., 
Zeithaml, V .A. and Berry, L.L. (1994) Reassessment of expectations as 
a comparison standard in measuring service quality: implications for 
future research.  Journal of Marketing , Vol. 58(1), pp. 111–132.      
       4.          Wiersema ,    F.             ( 1998 )        Customer service: extraordinary results at Southwest 
Airlines, Charles Schwab, Land’s End, American Express, Staples and 
USAA            .  New York :       Harper Collins              .  
       5.         International Customer Service Association. (2002) Measuring
customer service performance: ﬁ nal results.
       6.          www.wireless.att.com/businesscenter/en_US/pdf/ICEECaseStudy.
pdf . Accessed 27 January 2008. 
       7.         Courtesy of ScriptLogic Corporation. 
  http://www.filebuzz.com/software_screenshot/full/20119-
bridgetrak_help_desk_software.jpg . Accessed 27 January 2008. 
       8.          http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId     /H11005     prUS20639307 & page
Type     /H11005     PRINTFRIENDLY . Accessed 15 January 2008. 
       9.         Talisma Corporation. (2007) Winning strategies for e-mail management. 
White paper. 
      10.         CustomerRespect.com report cited in eGain (2004). Mission-critical 
customer service: 10 best practices for success. eGain Corporation, 
August.
      11.         Talisma Corporation. (2007) Winning strategies for e-mail management. 
White paper. 
      12.         Gartner Inc. (2007) Magic quadrant for CRM customer service 
contact centers. March.      
      13.          http://heat.frontrange.co.uk/common/Files/Xtra_Sites/HEAT/
casestudy_HEAT_Coca_Cola.pdf . Accessed 28 January 2008. 
      14.          www.kana.com/solutions.php?tid     /H11005     105 . Accessed 27 December 
2007.
      15.         Oracle Mobile Field Service data sheet, 2006. 
      16.         Oracle Contact Centre Telephony Analytics data sheet, 2006. 

===== PAGE 486 =====
 
              Organizational issues and 
customer relationship 
management  
 Chapter 17 

===== PAGE 487 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 488 =====
 
           Chapter objectives      
   By the end of this chapter you will understand: 
    1.   how various organizational roles use CRM tools  
    2.   several ways of organizing the customer interface to achieve CRM objectives, 
including functional, geographic, brand or product, market or customer and matrix 
organizations  
    3.   how IT acts as a proxy for structure in the networked or virtual organization  
    4.   the role of key account management structures in CRM.         
    Introduction 
  In this chapter you will learn about several front-ofﬁ ce roles in which CRM 
plays an important role, and how companies organize their customer 
interface to achieve their CRM objectives. We will examine several roles 
that make signiﬁ  cant use of CRM tools: sales representative, account 
manager, marketing manager, market analyst, campaign manager, market 
manager, customer relationship manager and customer service agent. 
  The chapter also examines organizational structures as they relate to 
CRM implementations. Organizational structures serve both to enable and 
to constrain business outcomes. For example, it is very difﬁ cult to promote 
creativity in a rule-bound bureaucracy. Conversely, a bureaucracy is highly 
conducive to obtaining compliance to standardized business processes. 
Similarly, it is a struggle to become customer-centric in a functional 
organization where specialists report upwards within silos, but do not 
share customer insight horizontally across silos. Consequently, there is no 
single correct structure that is suitable for all organizations. What is right 
depends upon the strategic goals of the business and we turn to this issue 
later in the chapter. First we review some of the roles that use CRM tools. 
    Organizational roles 
and CRM 
  Earlier in the book, we identiﬁ ed four different forms of CRM: strategic, 
operational, analytical and collaborative. Strategic CRM is focused on 
the development of a customer-centric business culture that is dedicated 
to winning and keeping customers by creating and delivering value 
better than competitors. Operational CRM focuses on the automation of 
customer-facing processes such as selling, marketing and customer service. 
Analytical CRM focuses on the intelligent mining of customer-related data 

===== PAGE 489 =====
 
466 Customer Relationship Management
for strategic or tactical purposes. Collaborative CRM applies technology 
across organizational boundaries with a view to optimizing company, 
partner and customer value. These different forms of CRM vary in their 
signiﬁ cance for the roles we examine here: sales representative, account 
manager, marketing manager, market analyst, campaign manager, market 
manager, customer relationship manager, and customer service agent. 
    Sales representative 
   Not all sales representatives perform the same role. For example, there 
are sales representatives who act as: 
●       deliverer : the representative who delivers bottled water for the ofﬁ ce 
water cooler  
●       order taker : the shop assistant in an electrical goods retail store  
●       missionary : the pharmaceutical company representative whose job is 
principally to nurture relationships with doctors and specialists  
●       technician : the engineer who consults to clients considering the 
purchase of cranes and hoists  
●       demand creator  : the representative who sells  ‘ unsought goods and 
services ’ , that is, products that have to be sold, rather than products 
that are sought after and bought, for example advertising space, 
insurance or encyclopaedias  
●       solution vendor : the representative who sells computer networks, or 
enterprise CRM suites.  1
  The selling challenge also ranges from taking stock ﬁ ll orders that maintain 
inventory levels of basic commodities, to team selling of high-technology 
military systems to national governments. Some representatives focus on 
winning new accounts (hunters) and others focus on nurturing existing 
accounts (farmers). Whatever the sales role, representatives are typically 
exposed to operational CRM and use sales-force automation solutions 
that help them maintain contacts, keep track of opportunities and manage 
their territories and accounts. 
    Account manager 
  Whereas sales representatives may be organized to serve geographic 
territories, or to sell speciﬁ  c product categories, account managers are 
committed to serving nominated customers or groups of customers. 
Account managers occupy boundary-spanning roles. That is, they have 
a foot in two camps: that of their employer and that of their customer. 
The account manager must ensure that the employer understands the 
requirements of the customer, and that the customer understands what 
the account manager’s company can do for them. Account managers 
are usually responsible for developing, maintaining and improving the 
proﬁ tability of relationships with clients. They may operate alone or enjoy 
the support of an account team, offering specialist help to the customer 
and account manager. Leads are generally fed to account managers. Like 
sales representatives, account managers make good use of sales-force 

===== PAGE 490 =====
 
Organizational issues and customer relationship management 467
automation, particularly account management, contact management, 
pipeline management and sales forecasting. 
    Marketing manager 
  The detailed job descriptions of marketing managers vary enormously, 
but one thing that they have in common is that their core goal is to 
manage demand. Some marketers try to decrease demand (e.g. health 
agency marketers for tobacco products), some try to redistribute demand 
(e.g. hoteliers shifting over-demand from high season to the shoulders 
and off season), but most try to increase demand. By increasing 
demand, marketers have an impact on shareholder value. 
2   A number of 
marketing decisions are important elements of strategic CRM, as was 
pointed out in Chapter 12, including target market selection and value 
proposition development. Marketing practitioners strive to develop value 
propositions that targeted customers prefer over competitors. Many 
marketers conduct market and customer analysis, develop product, brand 
or category plans, generate leads and align their marketing efforts with 
channel partners. This exposes them to operational CRM in the form of 
marketing automation modules for customer and market segmentation, 
lead management, marketing resource management and product lifecycle 
management; to analytical CRM as they perform analysis on market, 
customer and environmental data in order to identify opportunities and 
threats; and to partner relationship management (PRM) applications as 
they engage in collaborative CRM with their channel partners. 
    Market analyst 
   Market analysts generally occupy entry level or junior positions, yet 
this belies the importance of their role. Although analysts have no line 
management responsibility for sales or proﬁ  t, the ability to make sense 
of, or interpret, market and customer data provides a foundation for 
line management decisions such as target market selection, product 
design and communication and channel choice. Fluency with marketing 
analytics or web analytics is essential for market analysts, who need to 
be able to choose the right analytical approach for different types of data: 
nominal, ordinal, interval and ratio.  
    Campaign manager 
  Campaign managers are responsible for planning, implementing, 
evaluating and reporting on marketing campaigns targeted at prospects 
and customers, whether consumers or organizations, across a range of 
channels including direct mail, e-mail, web and text messaging. Campaign 
managers are generally charged with achieving KPIs such as lead 
generation, customer acquisition, cross-sales and customer retention. They 
are expected to work with a number of internal stakeholders including 
line managers in marketing, sales and customer development roles, IT 
management, data analysts and privacy ofﬁ cers. Managing relationships 
with external stakeholders, such as direct mail vendors, e-mail marketers, 

===== PAGE 491 =====
 
468 Customer Relationship Management
creative agencies and print suppliers, also falls to campaign managers. 
Unsurprisingly, campaign managers use operational CRM modules for 
campaign management, e-mail and direct mail campaign management 
and marketing optimization. In the absence of inhouse or external 
specialist analytics expertise, they might also be expected to use marketing  
analytics and web analytics to target and evaluate their campaigns. 
    Market manager 
   The word market is used in a number of ways. The traditional use 
is to describe a meeting place for buyers and sellers. The word is still 
used in the same way, for example, you might have a local  ‘ Farmers ’
Market ’  where farmers sell direct to the public. The word is also used to 
describe customers and vendors buying and selling a particular product 
class, such as the car market or the wheat market. Market also refers 
to customer groupings, irrespective of product class, such as the DINK 
(double-income, no kids) market or the German market. 
   Market managers are generally responsible for business operations 
for particular geographic areas, market segments or product classes. 
Respective examples are market manager (Asia-Paciﬁ  c), market 
manager (SOHO (small ofﬁ ce, home ofﬁ ce)) or market manager (Aircraft 
Tyres). Given the focus on geography, customer or product, almost any 
operational CRM application might be used by a market manager. The 
geographic market manager might use territory management, a customer 
market manager might use account management and a product market 
manager might use a product encyclopaedia application.  
    Customer relationship manager 
  Customer relationship managers are becoming more widespread; they 
can be found in many business-to-business (B2B) companies and in a 
smaller number of business-to-consumer industries, such as personal 
banking and wealth management. Customer relationship managers are 
responsible for maintaining and growing the value of speciﬁ ed customer 
relationships. They have to be skilled at identifying new opportunities 
to grow share-of-customer by cross-selling and up-selling. In a B2B 
context, they need to understand customers ’  businesses, processes and 
products and to be able to identify when their employer ’ s products and 
services might be of value. At heart, customer relationship managers 
need to listen effectively, understand customer needs, recognize 
opportunities and respond appropriately. They make use of operational 
CRM applications, such as account management, contact management, 
opportunity management, order management, proposal generation, 
quotation management and sales forecasting. 
    Customer service agent 
  Customer service agents generally operate out of call and contact centres, 
working with a range of communications technologies. CSAs can perform 
inbound, outbound or blended communications roles. Inbound CSAs 

===== PAGE 492 =====
 
Organizational issues and customer relationship management 469
handle service matters such as account queries, complaints and service 
requests. Outbound CSAs work collaboratively with campaign managers 
and marketing teams. Depending on their role, CSAs use operational 
CRM systems that range across sales, marketing and service applications. 
   We now turn to the issue of organizational structures for CRM 
implementations.
    Strategic goals of CRM 
   The expression  ‘ strategy before structure ’  comes from the work of Alfred 
Chandler.  3   He was stressing the point that organizations should decide 
their strategic goals before designing the structure of the organization 
to achieve those goals. Companies adopting CRM as their core business 
strategy need to create an organizational structure that achieves three 
major outcomes through its marketing, selling and service functions: 
●      the acquisition of carefully targeted customers or market segments  
●      the retention and development of strategically signiﬁ cant customers 
or market segments  
●      the continuous development and delivery of competitively superior 
value propositions and experiences to the selected customers. 
  No organization can expect to achieve these outcomes alone. All have to 
work in close cooperation with suppliers, partners and other members of 
their business network. This means that the organizational structure has to 
facilitate the cooperation of several normally autonomous organizations. 
  These goals have to be achieved in an environment of increasing 
turbulence. Between the end of World War Two and the 1970s the 
business environment was relatively stable. Businesses could develop 
strategies and structures that only infrequently needed revision. Today’s 
environment is one in which there is immense volatility: deregulation, 
global competition, new technologies providing additional routes to 
market, the emergence of new national market economies and highly 
demanding and well-educated customers. Structures need to be invented 
that allow organizations to sense and respond to change with great speed.  
    Conventional customer 
management structures 
  We will start by considering a standalone company as it organizes to 
achieve these three CRM goals. This company is presented with a number 
of alternative structures: 
    1.     functional organization structure 
    2.     geographical organization structure  

===== PAGE 493 =====
 
470 Customer Relationship Management
    3.     product, brand or category organization structure  
    4.     market or customer-based organization structure 
    5.     matrix organization structure.    
    Functional structure 
  A functional structure has sales, marketing and service specialists 
reporting to a functional head such as a director or vice president of sales 
and marketing. The specialists might include market analyst, market 
researcher, campaign manager, account manager, service engineer, 
and sales support specialist. Small- to medium-sized businesses with 
narrow product ranges tend to prefer the functional organization. The 
three core disciplines that interface with customers, sales, marketing and 
service, may or may not coordinate their efforts and share their customer 
knowledge by depositing it in a common customer database. From a CRM 
perspective it would be better if they did. Elsewhere in a functionally 
organized business there will be other specialists whose decisions can 
impact on customer acquisition, retention and experience, for example, 
specialists in operations, human resources and accounts receivable. These 
experts would also beneﬁ t from having access to customer information. 
Very often, functional specialists feel a sense of loyalty to their discipline 
rather than their customers. 
    Geographical structure 
  A geographical structure organizes some or all of the three core CRM 
disciplines, marketing, selling and service, on territorial lines. Selling and 
service are more commonly geographically dispersed than marketing. 
International companies often organize geographically around the 
Americas, EMEA (Europe, Middle East and Africa) and Asia-Paciﬁ  c 
regions. Smaller companies may organize around national, regional or 
local areas. 
   Where customers are geographically dispersed and value face-to-face 
contact with salespeople, there is a clear beneﬁ t in salespeople also being 
geographically dispersed. Where service needs to be delivered at remote 
locations, service may also be distributed geographically. Because 
selling and service costs can be very high, companies try to ﬁ nd ways to 
perform these activities more cost-effectively. Some companies sell face-
to-face to their most important customers and offer a telesales service 
to others. Others provide service through centralized contact centres 
that might either be outsourced or company operated. Websites that 
enable customers to service their own requirements can also reduce cost. 
Technology companies such as EMC have found ways to reduce service 
costs by developing a technology-enabled remote problem-sensing and 
problem-solution capability (see Case 17.1). 
  One disadvantage of this approach, from a CRM perspective, is that 
there may be many different customer types in a single geographic 
area. A salesperson selling industrial chemicals might have to call on 
companies from several industries such as textiles, paint or consumer 
goods manufacture. The applications of the sold product may be diverse; 

===== PAGE 494 =====
 
Organizational issues and customer relationship management 471
the buying criteria of the customers may be quite different. Some may 
regard the product as mission critical; others may regard it insigniﬁ cant. 
The problem is multiplied if a salesperson sells many products to many 
customer groups. The salesperson develops neither customer nor product 
expertise.
       Case 17.1   
  EMC delivers remote customer service      
   EMC sells information storage, systems, networks and services worldwide. EMC provides 
proactive and pre-emptive customer service. EMC systems are conﬁ  gured to identify 
problems. If an EMC system detects an error or unexpected event, no matter how small, it 
will automatically call home to the support centre that is available 24/7. Staff immediately 
research the issue by dialling back into the system. Over 90 per cent of service calls are 
resolved remotely, most often without the customer even being aware there has been a 
problem or there being any impact on the information system. 
    Product, brand or category structure 
  A product or brand organization structure is common in companies that 
produce a wide variety of products, especially when they have different 
marketing, sales or service requirements. This sort of structure is common 
in large consumer goods companies, such as Procter and Gamble and 
Unilever, and in diversiﬁ  ed business-to-business companies. Product 
or brand managers are generally responsible for developing marketing 
strategy for their products, and then coordinating the efforts of specialists 
in marketing research, advertising, selling, merchandising, sales promotion 
and service, to ensure that the strategic objectives are achieved. Normally, 
brand and product managers have to compete for company resources 
to support their brands, through an annual planning cycle inviting the 
brand managers to submit and defend their marketing plans. Resources 
are spread thinly across many brands and the company risks becoming 
focused on products rather than customers. Procter and Gamble found 
that brand managers became isolated, competing vigorously against each 
other, focusing on their own goals rather than those of the corporation. 
Brands competed against each other, creating cannibalization. 
4
  Many multibrand companies have found that brand management is an 
expensive way to market their offerings. In a worst-case scenario, different 
brand managers might be calling on the same customer on the same day. 
This certainly gives the impression of a lack of coordination and a disregard 
for the value of the customer’s time. The customer may also experience 
varying levels of service from the different brand or product managers. 
Some companies have tried to coordinate their product marketing efforts 
by appointing product group managers to an oversight role. 
  More recently, some leading companies have moved to a category 
management structure. Procter and Gamble did this in the 1980s in 

===== PAGE 495 =====
 
472 Customer Relationship Management
response to the problems outlined earlier. Kraft markets a number of 
different brands, including Louis Rich cold meat cuts and Oscar Mayer 
hot dogs. The company has now appointed category business directors 
who coordinate a team of functional experts focused on each major 
category ( Figure 17.1   ). Brand managers sit on the category team. The 
category team works with a customer team that is dedicated to each major 
customer to ensure that the category offer generates proﬁ t for both Kraft 
and the customer. The customer team works closely with customers to 
help them learn how to beneﬁ t more from intelligent product assortment, 
shelf position and promotion decisions. They also help retailers to 
understand better and exploit their own customer data. Also dedicated 
to each category is a process team that is responsible for ensuring that 
business processes are aligned with customer requirements. Typically, the 
process team addresses issues of quality management and logistics. This 
sort of structure attempts to integrate product, functional and customer 
considerations. 
Process
team
leader
Quality
Plant
manager
Engineering
Materials
manager
Operations
finance
Category
business
director
R&D
Brand
manager
Category
sales
director
Finance
Marketing
information
Consumer
promotion
Customer
business
manager
Customer
category
managers
Sales
information
specialist
Supply
chain
specialist
Retail
sales
manager
Category
planner
Space
management
specialist
Process teams
(dedicated to each product category)
Category teams
(dedicated to each product category)
Customer teams
(dedicated to each major customer)
 Figure 17.1        Category management at Kraft5    
    Market or customer structure 
  Market or customer-based organization structures are common when 
companies serve different customers or customer groups that are felt to 
have different requirements or buying practices. Dell, for example, sells 
to SOHO (small ofﬁ  ce, home ofﬁ  ce), medium-sized businesses, large 
businesses and government/institutional markets. IBM has refocused its 
selling efforts on 14 different customer groups. Royal Bank of Canada has 
rebuilt its organization to focus on customers, not product lines. Market- 
or customer-based managers come in many forms: market managers, 

===== PAGE 496 =====
 
Organizational issues and customer relationship management 473
segment managers, account managers and customer business managers, 
for example. The roles are responsible for becoming expert on market and 
customer requirements and for ensuring that the organization creates and 
delivers the right value proposition for the customer. Recently, there has 
been a trend towards national, key or global account management that 
we look at in more detail later in the chapter. 
    Matrix structure 
  A matrix organization is often the preferred structural solution when a 
company has several different product lines serving several different 
customer groups. A matrix typically has market- or customer-based 
managers on one side and product managers on the other side of the 
matrix, as in Figure 17.2   . In the high-tech industries, another common 
matrix structure is geography against industry. The sales team includes 
a salesperson and a pre-sales consultant. Salespeople are organized 
into geographic territories, but pre-sales consultants are organized 
by industry. This allows customers to have not only a geographically 
convenient point of face-to-face contact, but also an industry specialist 
on whose expertise they can draw. 
Product managers
Customer managers
12 34
B
C
D
E
A
 Figure 17.2 
      A matrix 
organization    
  A variation that is commonly found in multichannel organizations 
is the replacement of customer managers with channel managers. 
Multichannel retailers can have several routes to market: stores, 
catalogues, online retailing, perhaps even a television shopping channel. 
Financial services institutions also have many channels: branch networks, 
call centres, agency outlets and corporate websites. Matrix organizations 
have been popular since the 1970s, when they were felt to facilitate both 
horizontal and vertical communication, therefore improving coordination 
and reducing inefﬁ ciencies. 
  Market or customer managers in matrices are responsible for developing 
and maintaining proﬁ  table relationships with external customers. 
Generally, they view product managers in the matrix as suppliers. 
Sometimes the internal product manager will compete against external 
suppliers to become the market manager’s preferred supplier. Then, market 

===== PAGE 497 =====
 
474 Customer Relationship Management
managers will form internal customer–supplier relationships, negotiate 
prices and agree service levels just as they would with outside suppliers. 
Pricing internal transfers can be a tricky decision. One of two approaches 
is taken: either the internal supplier sells at external market prices (as if 
they were marketing to an external customer, and aiming to make a proﬁ t), 
or they sell at an internally agreed transfer price that enables market 
managers to return a proﬁ t on their external transactions and relationships. 
This price then allows the market manager more ﬂ exibility in negotiating 
price with the external customer. 
  As an alternative to, or in some cases a prelude to, the development of 
a matrix organization, many companies have opted for the use of cross-
functional teams. A cross-functional team is usually established when a 
project has implications that span normal functional, product or market 
lines. A cross-functional team, as we saw in Chapter 3, is often used 
to consider the implications of the adoption of CRM. It will consist of 
experts from marketing, sales, service, technology, ﬁ  nance and general 
management.
    Network and virtual 
organizations
   Business networks compete, not just standalone companies. Virgin 
Atlantic’s network competes with the networks of American Airlines 
and British Airways. Indeed, some members of Virgin Atlantic’s network 
may also be part of British Airways ’  and American Airlines ’  networks. 
  In this networked world, it is no longer a simple matter to know 
where an organization’s boundary lies. This brings us to the role of IT in 
organizational design. The role of IT in a stable corporate environment is to 
allow senior management to control information and decision making. 
6   A s  
environments become more turbulent and as companies attempt to forge 
network relationships, the role of IT has changed. Its role is now to provide 
information that enables the company and its network members to: 
●      sense and respond rapidly to changes in the business environment  
●      collaborate to develop and deliver better customer value propositions  
●      enhance and share their learning about customers  
●      improve their individual and joint cost proﬁ les.    
   The B-2 stealth bomber, for example, was the product of network 
collaboration. IT was a substitute for a more formalized and centralized 
organization structure linking the four contributing organizations. It has 
been suggested that IT functioned as a proxy for organizational structure 
in two ways: 
  ‘ First, the information systems aided coordination directly by 
making information-processing less costly. Secondly, this enhanced 
information-processing made the governance of the project more 
efﬁ cient ’ .  
7

===== PAGE 498 =====
 
Organizational issues and customer relationship management 475
   IT therefore has a number of inﬂ  uences on organizational design. It 
allows information to be shared not only right across an organization – 
vertically, horizontally and laterally – but also outside an organization 
with network members. Structure therefore no longer has to be tied to 
traditional vertical reporting relationships. IT also enables organizations 
to adapt the decentralized and networked structures that are necessary 
if they are to respond successfully to both environmental turbulence and 
customer expectations. 
  Customers do not want to learn how the organizations they patronize 
are structured. They do not want to have queries rerouted from one 
silo or specialist to another in search of a solution. Customers who hear 
the words:  ‘ That’s not my department. I’ll put you through to the right 
person ’ , or ﬁ nd themselves looping through IVR menus in search of 
a solution are likely to be dissatisﬁ  ed customers. Customers want their 
needs, demands and expectations to be met. Companies therefore need to 
create an organization structure that enables their products, services and 
information to be ubiquitously and immediately available in the channels 
that customers patronize. Traditional structures, particularly those that 
are functional, geographical or product-based, struggle to meet these 
standards. 
  Structures that are IT-enabled are more likely to meet customer 
requirements. For example, a web-based banking service is open every day 
and hour of the year. A typical branch-based service is open less than one-
third of the time. If the branch network were to replicate the scale of the 
web-based service, it would require three times the stafﬁ ng levels with a 
concomitant increase in management structure. Even then, this could not 
match the convenience of a home-accessed banking service, or its price. 
Datamonitor, for example, suggests that a branch-based transaction costs 
a bank 120 times the cost of an Internet transaction. 
8   Some or all of these 
transaction cost savings can be passed on to customers as improved prices. 
  At its most advanced, the IT-enabled organization is able to take any 
sales or service query from any customer through any channel and 
resolve it immediately. Among the preferred characteristics of such a 
design are: 
●      a customer interface that is consistent across channels and easy to use 
whatever the technology or device  
●      a  ﬁ rst point of contact that takes responsibility for resolving the query  
●      a back-end architecture that enables the contact point to obtain 
relevant customer and product information immediately. 
   These IT-enabled structures eliminate the need for conventional silo-
based geography-, function- and product-based arrangements.  
    Person-to-person contacts 
  Interpersonal contacts between people from the seller and buyer dyad 
are important, whether they are conducted face-to-face or mediated 

===== PAGE 499 =====
 
476 Customer Relationship Management
by technology such as phone, fax and e-mail. On the seller’s side these 
contacts are important for identifying customer needs, requirements and 
preferences, for understanding and managing customer expectations, for 
solving problems and showing commitment. Over the life of a relationship, 
such personal contacts contribute to the reduction of uncertainty and 
the creation of close social bonds. Interpersonal communication also 
underpins the development of product and process adaptations that serve 
as investments in the relationship. These act as structural bonds. 
   Relationships between individuals on buyer and seller sides tend to be 
hierarchically matched. 
9   Sales representatives meet with buyers, general 
managers meet with general managers. Researchers have also identiﬁ  ed 
three main patterns of interorganizational contact.  10
    1 .       Controlled contact pattern  : where all contacts are physically 
channelled through a single point of contact, typically a salesperson 
on the seller’s side or a buyer on the customer side. This individual 
manages all the contacts on the other side of the dyad. There are two 
forms of this pattern: 
     –     seller-controlled 
     –     buyer-controlled. 
   2 .       Coordinated contact pattern : many different departments or individuals 
have direct personal contacts with departments or individuals on 
the other side, but there is one department or person, usually a buyer 
or sales representative, who is involved in and coordinates all these 
contacts. There are three forms of this pattern: 
     –     seller coordinated pattern 
     –     buyer coordinated pattern 
     –     seller and buyer coordinated pattern. 
   3 .       Stratiﬁ ed contact pattern : where individuals and departments on both 
sides of the dyad manage their own contacts with their equivalents on 
the other side of the dyad. 
   These established patterns are breaking down under the inﬂ uence of new 
technologies. Now it is possible to have many-to-many communications 
between contacts on the buyer’s and seller’s sides, enabled by web 
technologies. The coordination of these contacts is one of the features of 
CRM application software. Modern communication technologies, such 
as e-mail and the web, require the use of multichannel consolidation 
infrastructures if all types of communication are to be consolidated into 
a single record of interorganizational contact.  
    Key account management 
  Many B2B companies have adopted a market-based customer 
management structure, variously called key account management, national 
account management, regional account management or global account 
management. We use the term key account management (KAM) to cover 
all four forms. KAM is a structure that facilitates the implementation of 
CRM at the level of the business unit. 

===== PAGE 500 =====
 
Organizational issues and customer relationship management 477
  A key account is an account that is strategically signiﬁ  cant. This 
normally means that it presently or potentially contributes signiﬁ  cantly 
to the achievement of company objectives, such as proﬁ  tability. It may 
also be a high volume account, a benchmark customer, an inspiration, or 
a door opener, as described in Chapter 5. 
   Companies choose one of two ways to implement KAM. Either a 
single dedicated person is responsible for managing the relationship, 
or a team is assigned as in the Kraft example mentioned earlier. The 
team membership might be fully dedicated to a single key account or 
may work on several accounts. Generally, this is under the leadership of 
a dedicated account director. The motivation to adopt a KAM structure 
comes from recognition of a number of business conditions: 
   1 .       Concentration of buying power  lies in fewer hands. Big companies are 
becoming bigger. They control a higher share of corporate purchasing. 
Smaller companies are cooperating to create purchasing power 
and leverage purchasing economies. Even major competitors are 
collaborating to secure better inputs. For example, Procter and Gamble 
and Unilever, rivals on the supermarket shelf, are cooperating to buy 
raw materials and input goods such as chemicals and packaging. 
    2 .       Globalization : as companies become global they want to deal 
with global suppliers, if only for mission critical purchases. Global 
companies expect to procure centrally, but require goods and services 
to be provided locally.  
    3 .       Vendor reduction programmes : customers are reducing the number 
of companies they buy from, as they learn to enjoy the beneﬁ  ts of 
improved relationships with fewer vendors.  
   4 .       More demanding customers : customers are demanding that suppliers 
become leaner. This means they eliminate non-value adding activities. 
The corollary is that they want suppliers to supply exactly what 
they want. This may mean more reliable, more responsive customer 
services and just-in-time delivery. 
  A supplier may decide that it wants to introduce a KAM system, but 
it is generally the customer who decides whether to permit this sort of 
relationship to develop. If customers feel that their needs are better met 
outside of a KAM-based relationship, they are unlikely to participate in 
a KAM programme. 
  According to one study, suppliers are ﬁ nding considerable beneﬁ ts in 
the adoption of KAM.  
11
●      doing large amounts of business with a few customers offers 
considerable opportunities to improve efﬁ ciency and effectiveness  
●      selling at a relationship level can spawn disproportionately high and 
beneﬁ cial volume, turnover and proﬁ t  
●      repeat business can be considerably cheaper to win than new business 
●      long-term relationships enable the use of facilitating technologies, 
such as EDI and shared databases  
●      familiarity and trust reduce the need for checking and make it easier 
to do business. 

===== PAGE 501 =====
 
478 Customer Relationship Management
  Although the research suggests major beneﬁ ts for sellers, the companies 
that succeed at KAM are those that perform better at a whole range of 
management activities, including selecting strategic customers, growing 
key accounts and locking out the competition. 
    ‘ Companies that are most effective at developing strategic customer 
relationships spend more time and effort thinking about their customers ’
proﬁ les, direction and future needs than the least effective  …  (T)hey 
spend relatively less time and effort considering how their strategic 
customers will beneﬁ t themselves as suppliers ’ .12
   Concentration of buying power has lead to buyers taking charge 
of relationships. Many companies have supplier accreditation and 
certiﬁ cation processes in place. To be shortlisted as a potential supplier, 
vendors often have to invest in satisfying these criteria. Buyers 
increasingly have documented processes that compel vendors to deal 
with speciﬁ c members of a decision-making unit at speciﬁ  c times in the 
buying process. Under these circumstances, sellers may not have the 
chance to exhibit their exceptional selling capabilities. What they must 
do, however, is demonstrate their relationship management capabilities. 
  KAM differs from regular business-to-business account management in 
a number of important ways. First, the focus is not on margins earned on 
each individual transaction; rather the emphasis is on building a mutually 
valuable long-term relationship. The effect of this is that a more trusting, 
cooperative, non-adversarial relationship develops. Secondly, key account 
plans are more strategic. They look forward ﬁ ve or more years. Non-key 
accounts are subjected to more tactical campaigning designed to lift sales 
in the short term. Thirdly, the KAM (team) is in continuous contact, very 
often across several functions and at multiple levels of hierarchy. Special 
access is often provided to customer senior management. Contact with 
non-key accounts tends to be less frequent and less layered. Fourthly, 
suppliers make investments in key accounts that serve as structural 
bonds. Indeed, even the allocation of a dedicated key account manager 
or team represents an investment in the customer. Additionally, suppliers 
are much more likely to adapt elements of their value proposition such 
as products, inventory levels, price, service levels and processes for 
key accounts. Some additional elements might be added to the value 
proposition for key accounts. This might include vendor-managed 
inventory, joint production planning, staff training and assistance with the 
customer’s product development and marketing strategies. 
   KAM can be thought of as a form of investment management, 
where the manager makes decisions about which accounts merit most 
investment, and what forms that investment should take. 
   Researchers have made efforts to understand how KAM develops 
over time. 
13    Figure 17.3    shows KAM developing through several 
stages as suppliers and customers become more closely aligned. As the 
relationship becomes more collaborative, and as the level of involvement 
between the two parties grows, the commitment to more advanced 
forms of KAM grows. 
   In the pre-KAM stage, a prospective key account – one that shows 
signs of being strategically signiﬁ cant – has been identiﬁ  ed. Because the 
prospect is supplied by other vendors, the major task is to motivate a 

===== PAGE 502 =====
 
Organizational issues and customer relationship management 479
modiﬁ ed re-buy, most likely by identifying ways in which the new 
solution meets customer requirements better. In the early KAM stage, 
the new supplier has won a small share of customer spend, and is on 
trial. The early KAM structure often takes the form of a bow-tie ( Figure 
17.4   ), in which the only contact is between single representatives of each 
company, typically account manager and buyer. These contacts act as 
gatekeepers, liaising with their own colleagues as needed. 
Level of involvement
with customers
Nature of customer relationship
Transactional Collaborative
Simple
Complex
Synergistic-KAM
Partnership-KAM
Mid-KAM
Early-KAM
Pre-KAM
 Figure 17.3 
      A model of KAM 
development    
Marketing
Logistics
Operations
Finance
Key
Account
Mgr
Marketing
Logistics
Operations
Finance
Main
Contact
Selling company Buying company
 Figure 17.4 
      Bow-tie structure 
for early KAM    
  The bow-tie is a very fragile arrangement. If either party doesn’t get 
on well with the other, the relationship might not evolve. If either moves 
on or retires, the relationship may be severed. The ability of the supplier 
company to understand the customer depends on the skills of one person 

===== PAGE 503 =====
 
480 Customer Relationship Management
alone. If that person doesn’t record what is known in a customer database, 
it might be lost forever. Customers will sometimes refuse vendors access 
to other contacts. This is often designed to demonstrate power. 
  As it becomes clearer that the relationship is paying off for both 
parties, it may migrate to mid-KAM status. The customer has come 
to trust the supplier, and the supplier has shown commitment to the 
customer. The supplier is now a preferred, though not sole supplier. 
There are other, more senior, contacts between the organizations. As the 
relationship heads towards partnership KAM status, the relationship 
becomes more established. The customer views the supplier as a 
strategic resource. Information is shared to enable the parties to resolve 
problems jointly. Customers might invite suppliers to go  ‘ open book ’  
so that cost structures are transparent. Pricing is stable and determined 
by the tenure and value of the relationship. Innovations are offered to 
key accounts ﬁ rst before being introduced to other customers. There is 
functional alignment, as specialists talk to their counterparts on the other 
side. There is much more contact between the companies at every level. 
The job of the key account manager is to coordinate all these contacts to 
ensure that the account objectives are achieved. This sort of relationship 
is often represented as a diamond ( Figure 17.5   ). 
R&D
Admin
Operations
Outbound
logistics
Board
Key
Account
Mgr
R&D
Admin
Operations
Inbound
logistics
Main
contact
Buying companySelling company Board
 Figure 17.5 
      Diamond structure 
for partnership 
KAM    
  The most advanced form of KAM, identiﬁ ed as synergistic KAM, occurs 
when a symbiotic relationship has developed. As  Figure 17.6    suggests, 
the boundaries between the two organizations are blurred as both sides 
share resources and people to work on mutually valued projects. These 
might be cost reduction projects, new product development projects, 
quality assurance projects or other ventures beyond the scope of their 
present relationship. 

===== PAGE 504 =====
 
Organizational issues and customer relationship management 481
  This developmental model does not suggest that all KAM arrangements 
migrate along the pathway towards synergistic KAM. KAM will only 
advance as far as the parties want. If either party ﬁ  nds they are not 
beneﬁ ting from the arrangement, it can be reversed and become more 
transactional. Key account status might be withdrawn if the customer 
ceases being strategically signiﬁ cant, purchases from a major competitor of 
the supplier, becomes ﬁ nancially unstable, displays unethical behaviours 
or demands too many concessions, making the relationship unproﬁ table. 
   There are also situations that can lead to relationship dissolution. 
This might happen if the customer ﬁ  nds that the supplier has acted 
opportunistically, thereby breaking trust. Opportunistic behaviours 
might include ramping up price, betraying conﬁ  dences to third parties, 
supplying the customer’s major competitors or artiﬁ  cially restricting 
supply. Suppliers can also  ‘ sack ’  customers, for example, when it is clear 
that there is no prospect of making a proﬁ t from the relationship even if 
it were to be re-engineered to reduce cost. 
   Progress along the KAM pathway may also be limited by either party’s 
relationships with other companies. It may be impossible for a vending 
machine company to develop a strong relationship with PepsiCo, if it 
already has a strong relationship with Coca Cola.  
    Team selling 
  Team selling is a form of selling that is often associated with the more 
advanced forms of KAM. A key account team is assembled that consists of 
  Figure 17.6 
      Virtual organization 
for synergistic KAM     
Key
account
manager
Main
contact
Finance
focus teamR&D
focus team
Market research
focus teamQuality
focus team
Selling company Buying company
Operations
focus team
Board joint
meetings

===== PAGE 505 =====
 
482 Customer Relationship Management
a number of specialists that can sense and respond to customer concerns 
over a variety of issues. The team might, for example, include people from 
engineering, logistics, research and development and sales. Collaborative 
team selling may even cross organizational boundaries. Representatives 
from two or more partnering organizations can come together to pitch 
for new business or service an established customer. Partner relationship 
management systems facilitate such arrangements by making customer, 
project and product information available to all partners. 
   These teams may be thought of as a multiperson selling centre, 
in much the same way that the customer has a multiperson buying 
centre or decision-making unit. The selling centre might have a ﬁ  xed 
composition throughout the relationship with the customer, though the 
make-up is more likely to vary. For example, at the beginning of the 
relationship a  ‘ hunter ’  might initially win the account. Later a  ‘ farmer ’  
takes over and builds the team to maintain and manage the relationship 
for mutual beneﬁ t. 
   Major decisions for team selling concern the composition of the team, 
coordination of team efforts and measurement of team performance. 
Coordination can be achieved through conformance to a cultural norm 
(for example, a focus on customer satisfaction, or mutual beneﬁ  t), 
formal rules and plans, deference to hierarchical direction, improved 
communication facilitated by committee meetings or IT. Intranets can be 
especially useful in this respect.
        Summary      
   This chapter has examined a number of organizational issues, as they relate to the 
implementation of CRM. 
   We found that different forms of CRM – strategic, operational, analytical and 
collaborative – touch on a number of roles with varying degrees of signiﬁ  cance: sales 
representative, account manager, marketing manager, market analyst, campaign 
manager, market manager, customer relationship manager, customer service agent and 
key account manager. 
   Agreeing the CRM strategy is a necessary prelude to deciding on structure. There 
are a number of conventional organizational models for the customer-facing parts 
of a business: sales, marketing and service. They can be organized around functions, 
geography, products, markets or they can take a matrix form. As organizational 
boundaries become blurred, CRM strategies can be seen as being delivered by networks 
and virtual organizations, where IT serves as a proxy for structure. Sharing information 
across the network acts in the same way as organizational structure to facilitate the 
achievement of objectives. 
   One important market-based approach to organizational structure is key 
account management. Key accounts are strategically signiﬁ  cant customers 
which the selling company is prepared to invest in. Key account management 

===== PAGE 506 =====
 
Organizational issues and customer relationship management 483
  References  
       1.          McMurray ,    R.N.                ( 1961 )        The mystique of super-salesmanship .            Harvard 
Business Review       , Vol.  March–April         , p.  114           . 
       2.          Doyle ,    P .             ( 2000 )        Value-based marketing: marketing strategies for corporate 
growth and shareholder value             .  Chichester :       John Wiley              . 
       3.          Chandler ,    A.D.     Jr             ( 1962 )        Strategy and Structure: Concepts in the History of 
the Industrial Enterprise             .  Casender, MA :       MIT Press              . 
       4.          Martinsons ,    A.G.B.   and   Martinsons ,    M.G.                ( 1994 )        In search of structural 
excellence .            Leadership and Organization Development Journal       , Vol.  15      ( 2 )       , 
p p . 2 4   –        2 8         .  
       5.         George, Michael, Anthony Freeling  &  David Court  ‘ Reinventing the 
Marketing Organization ’  McKinsey Quarterly, No. 4, 1994. 
       6.          Whisler ,    T.L.             ( 1970 )        The impact of computers on organizations             .  New York : 
      Praeger              . 
       7.          Argyres ,    N.S.                ( 1999 )        N.S. The impact of information technology on co-
ordination: evidence from the B-2 Stealth bomber .            Organization Science       ,  
Vol.  10      ( 2 )       , pp.  162  –       180        . 
       8.         Datamonitor. (1999)  Banking and e-commerce: more than just another 
distribution channel . Special report. New York: Datamonitor. 
       9.          Cunningham ,    M.T.   and   Homse ,    E.                ( 1986 )        Controlling the marketing–
purchasing interface: resource development and organisational 
implications .            Industrial Marketing and Purchasing       , Vol.  1      ( 2 )       , pp.  3  –       27        . 
      10.          Cunningham ,    M.T.   and   Homse ,    E.                ( 1986 )        Controlling the marketing–
purchasing interface: resource development and organisational 
implications .            Industrial Marketing and Purchasing       , Vol.  1      ( 2 )       , pp.  3  –       27        . 
      11.           Policy Publications          ( 1998 )        Developing strategic customers and key 
accounts            .  Bedford :       Policy Publications            ,  (author John Hurcombe)     . 
      12.         Quotation attributed to John Hurcombe, author of  Developing strategic 
customers and key accounts  . Bedford: Policy Publications, in a press 
release. 
      13.         Millman A.F. and Wilson K.J. (1995) From key account selling to key 
account management. Journal of Marketing Science , Vol. 1(1), pp. 8–21; 
Macdonald, M. and Rogers, B. (1996)Key Account Management . Oxford: 
Butterworth-Heinemann. 
can be thought of as comprising a number of forms of structures. Early key 
account management often is thought of as a bow-tie structure; later stages of 
development can be characterized as a diamond shape. The ultimate form of 
key account management happens when corporate boundaries dissolve and the 
buyer and seller work together on projects of mutual interest. Team selling may 
be an important part of key account management.        

===== PAGE 507 =====
 
This page intentionally left blank

===== PAGE 508 =====
 
    Index   
 ABC     see   Activity-based costing   
 ABC Flowcharter   ,  82   
 AC Nielsen   ,  356   
 Account management   ,  399   ,  400   , 
 476–81
 Account managers   ,  466–7   
 Accreditation programmes   ,  315–16   
 Accuracy, data   ,  108   
 ACORN   ,  130   ,  131   
 Acquisition of customers   ,  227–31  
 costs   ,  139   
 CRM analytics, support from   ,  252   
 offers   ,  249–50   
 operational CRM tools   ,  250–2   
 performance indicators   ,  248–9   
 prospecting   ,  233–48   
 value estimates   ,  231–3    
 ACSI model     see   American Customer 
Satisfaction Index model   
 Activity-based costing (ABC)  
 customer portfolio management   , 
 138–41
 sacking customers   ,  286    
 Activity links   ,  51   ,  295–6   
 Activity management   ,  399   ,  451   
 Actor bonds   ,  51   ,  295   
 Additional beneﬁ ts   ,  199–200   
 Adhocracy   ,  75   
 Adrian Payne’s ﬁ ve-process model   ,  20   
 Advantage Card, Boots   ,  269   
 Advertising   ,  238–9   
 Advocacy groups   ,  234–335   
 Aerospatiale   ,  329   
 Affective advertising   ,  238   
 Afﬁ liations   ,  252   
 Afﬁ nium campaign management   , 
 419–20
 Agent management   ,  451   
 Agents   ,  336–7   
 AHA     see   American Heart Association   
 Airlines:
 customer satisfaction   ,  48   
 service quality   ,  205    
 Alenia   ,  330   
 Alignment of processes   ,  317–20   
 Alliances   ,  323–4   ,  329–31   
 Allied Domecq   ,  339   
 Amazon.com   ,  197   ,  198   ,  249   
 Ambush marketers   ,  176   
 American Airlines   ,  328   
 American Customer Satisfaction Index 
(ACSI) model   ,  47   
 American Heart Association (AHA)   , 
 111   
 AMP (Australian Mutual Provident)   , 
 293
 Analytical CRM   ,  9–11   ,  82   ,  97   ,  377–81  
 at AXA Seguros e Inversiones 
(AXA)   ,  10   
 market segmentation   ,  129   
 owner/investor relationships   ,  348    
 Andersen Consulting   ,  234   
 Anglo-Australian school   ,  53–4   
 Anheuser-Busch   ,  176   
 Application integration   ,  385–9   
 Architecture of CRM   ,  381   
  ‘ Arrival at hotel ’    ,  172   
 Asian school   ,  54   
 Asset management   ,  418   
 Assurances   ,  201   
 AT & T   ,  331   
 Attitudinal loyalty   ,  270   
 Attractiveness, factors inﬂ uencing   ,  152   
 Augmented product   ,  198   
 Australian Mutual Provident     see   A M P    
 Automated workﬂ ow   ,  390–1   
 Automation   ,  6–9   
 Automobile manufacturers   ,  17   
 Avaya   ,  371   
 Avon Cosmetics   ,  332   
 Avon Rubber   ,  297   
 AXA group   ,  10   
 B2B     see   Business-to-business   
 B2C     see   Business-to-consumer   
 Back-ofﬁ ce processes   ,  80   

===== PAGE 509 =====
 
486 Index
 BAe   ,  330   
 Banded packs   ,  243   
 Banks   ,  17  
 customer activity cycle   ,  173   
 customer portfolio management   , 
 126
 customer satisfaction   ,  48   
 transaction costs   ,  475    
 Barclays bank   ,  38   
 Barnes, Jim   ,  27   
 Bassett, Bertie   ,  176   
 Batch processing   ,  385   
 BCG matrix     see   Boston Consulting 
Group matrix   
 Behavioural loyalty   ,  270   
 Benchmark customers   ,  157   
 Benchmarking partners   ,  331–2   
 Beneﬁ t competitors   ,  129   
 Beneﬁ ts:  
 segmentation   ,  131   
 value for customers   ,  199    
 Bennetton   ,  336   
 Berkshire Hathaway   ,  350   
 Best Western   ,  338   
 Bilateral relationships   ,  40   
 Bilateral termination   ,  29   
 Bivariate CPM models   ,  149–53   
 Blackberry   ,  371   
 Blueprinting     see   Flowcharting   
 BMW   ,  324   ,  330   
 Body Shop International   ,  278   ,  279   ,  317   
 Boise Ofﬁ ce Solutions   ,  6   
 Bonds   ,  274  
 social bonds   ,  274–5   
 structural bonds   ,  275–7    
 Bonus packs   ,  243   
 Boots   ,  269–70   
 Booz Allen  &  Hamilton   ,  74   
 Boston Consulting Group (BCG) 
matrix   ,  156–7   
 Bow-tie structure, for KAM   ,  479   
 Bradesco Bank   ,  329   
 Brand organization structure   ,  471–2   
 Branding   ,  200–1   
 Branson, Richard   ,  246   ,  351   
 British Airways   ,  328   
 British Home Stores   ,  321   
 British Petroleum (BP)   ,  175   
 Brokers   ,  337   
 Browser technologies   ,  389   
 Buffett, Warren   ,  350   
 Bundles   ,  200   
 Business case development   ,  70–1   
 Business Direct, analytical CRM   ,  348–9   
 Business excellence models   ,  316   
 Business network   ,  395   ,  298–9   
 Business performance   ,  43   ,  46   
 Business process   ,  80–3   
 Business-to-business (B2B)   ,  40   ,  41  
 customer portfolio management   , 
 126–7   ,  147–54   
 e-commerce   ,  325–7   
 prospecting   ,  233–5    
 Business-to-consumer (B2C)   ,  41–2   ,  43  
 customer portfolio management   , 
 126–7
 e-commerce   ,  325   
 mass customization   ,  196   
 prospecting   ,  238–45    
 Businesses:
 identiﬁ cation of market   ,  129   
 market segmentation   ,  132–4    
 Buy-in   ,  76–7   
 BUZGate.org   ,  215   
 Buzz marketing   ,  244   
 CAC     see   Customer activity cycle   
 Cadbury   ,  331   
 CAGs     see   Customer advocacy groups   
 Calculus based trust   ,  29   
 Call centres   ,  365   ,  371   ,  448   
 Call routing software   ,  9   
 Campaign management   ,  251   ,  418–20  
 customer development   ,  283   
 direct mail campaign management   , 
 422
 e-mail campaign management   ,  423   , 
 424
 enterprise marketing management   , 
 424
 Campaign managers   ,  467–8   
 Canon   ,  331   
 Canvassing   ,  237   ,  246   
 Capital costs   ,  139   
 Capital One   ,  386   
 CART     see   Classiﬁ cation and regression 
trees   
 Casa Buitoni   ,  42   
 Case assignment applications   ,  451   
 Case management   ,  452   
 Cash back   ,  243   ,  274   
 Category management   ,  322  
 structure   ,  471–2    
 Caterpillar   ,  332   
 Causal methods   ,  138   
 CBA     see   Commonwealth Bank of 
Australia
 CCBU     see   Coca Cola Bottling Unit   

===== PAGE 510 =====
 
Index 487
 Census data   ,  101   
 Century   ,  21   ,  338   
 CEOExpress   ,  236   ,  237   
 CGM     see   Customer generated media   
 Chaebols   ,  338   
 CHAID     see   Chi-square automatic 
interaction detection   
 Chandler, Alfred   ,  469   
 Change management needs, 
identiﬁ cation of   ,  74–5   
 Channel:
 customer development   ,  284   
 integration   ,  284   ,  447   
 prospecting   ,  234   
 value for customers   ,  218–19    
 Check-in episode   ,  172   
 CHEP    ,  418   
 Chi-square automatic interaction 
detection (CHAID)   ,  421   
 Chrysler   ,  234   ,  331   
 CI     see   Consumers International   
 CIF     see   Customer information ﬁ les   
 Citibank   ,  173   
 Classiﬁ cation and regression trees 
(CART)   ,  147   ,  420–1   
 Click-to-open rate (CTOR)   ,  423   
 CLM     see   Closed-loop marketing   
 Closed-loop marketing (CLM)   ,  416   
 Clubcard members, in Tesco   ,  143   
 Clubs for customers   ,  271–3   
 Cluster analysis   ,  420   
 Clustering techniques   ,  116   ,  144–5   
 Co-branding   ,  176–7   
 Coca Cola   ,  176   
 Coca Cola Bottling Unit (CCBU)   ,  456   
 Cognitive advertising   ,  238   
 Cohort values   ,  39   
 Cold calling   ,  237   
 Cold-canvassing   ,  246   
 Collaborative CRM   ,  11–12   ,  83   ,  97   ,  349   , 
 376
 Collaborative team selling   ,  482   
 Collection schemes   ,  274   
 Commercial contexts, of CRM   ,  17–18   
 Commitment:
 customer retention   ,  277–9    
 Commitment-Trust Theory of 
Relationship Marketing   ,  54   
 Committed customers   ,  232   
 Commonwealth Bank of Australia 
(CBA)   ,  285   
 Communication:
 customer development   ,  284   
 value for customers   ,  216–18    
 Companies:
 value for customers   ,  190–1    
 Company-generated messages   ,  175   
 Compaq   ,  294   ,  322   
 Competing ﬁ rms, alliances between   , 
 330
 complementary alliances   ,  331   
 quasi-concentration alliances   ,  330   
 shared supply alliances   ,  330    
 Competitions   ,  243   
 Competitors:
 customer retention   ,  280   
 identiﬁ cation of market   ,  129   
 value for customers   ,  190    
 Compiled list data   ,  100–1   
 Complaints management process   , 
 211–13   
 Complementary alliances   ,  331   
 Consortia   ,  338   
 Constituencies   ,  16   
 Consumer goods manufacturers   ,  17   
 Consumers:
 market segmentation   ,  129–32  
see also   Customers   
 Consumers International (CI)   ,  333   
 Contact centres   ,  447   
 Contact information   ,  98   
 Contact management   ,  399   ,  401  
 patterns   ,  476   
 sales-force automation (SFA)   ,  8    
 Continuous purchases   ,  274   
 Contract management   ,  399   ,  
452–3
 Controlled contact pattern   ,  476   
 Conventional customer management 
structures   ,  469–74   
 Conversion Model 
TM    ,  231–3   
 Conversion rates   ,  241   
 Cookies   ,  438–9   
 Co-operative Bank   ,  278   
 Coordinated contact pattern   ,  476   
 Core customer management strategies   , 
 158–9
 Core owner, attracting   ,  350   
 Core product   ,  198   
 Corporate culture   ,  280   
 Cost-to-serve   ,  36   
 Costs:
 activity-based costing   ,  286   
 customer retention   ,  260   
 loyalty schemes   ,  267   
 switching by customers   ,  263   
 value for customers   ,  188    
 Coupons   ,  243   

===== PAGE 511 =====
 
488 Index
 CPM     see   Customer portfolio 
management
 Craft customization   ,  195   
 Critical success factors (CSFs), 
dentiﬁ cation of   ,  78–9   
 Cross-functional teams   ,  474   
 Cross-promotions   ,  243   
 Cross-selling   ,  283   
 CRS     see   Customer referral scheme   
 CRV     see   Customer relationship value   
 CSA     see   Customer service agent   
 CSR     see   Customer service 
representative   
 CTOR     see   Click-to-open rate   
 Culture:  
 corporate contexts   ,  280–1    
 Customer:
 databases   ,  97   
 development   ,  283–4   
 and product management   ,  372–3    
 Customer acquisition   ,  227  
 costs   ,  139   
 CRM analytics, support from   ,  252   
 offers   ,  249–50   
 operational CRM tools   ,  250–2   
 performance indicators   ,  248–9   
 prospecting   ,  233–48   
 tenure, 32   
 value estimates   ,  231–3    
 Customer activity cycle (CAC)   ,  173   
 Customer advocacy groups (CAGs)   , 
 333–5
 Customer attractiveness, factors 
inﬂ uencing   ,  152   
 Customer-centric businesses   ,  4–5   
 Customer development   ,  257   ,  283–4   
 Customer experience and CRM   , 
 165–83
 link between   ,  182–3   
 software applications, inﬂ uence of   , 
 179–82
 Customer generated media (CGM)   , 
 216
 Customer information ﬁ elds:  
 communication preferences   ,  99   
 contact data   ,  98   
 contact history   ,  98   
 current pipeline   ,  99   
 opportunities   ,  99   
 products   ,  99   
 transactional history   ,  99    
 Customer information ﬁ les (CIF)   ,  365   
 Customer insight   ,  33–4   
 Customer intimacy   ,  192   
 Customer lifetime value (CLV)     see
 Lifetime value   
 Customer loyalty   ,  43   ,  44–6   
 Customer/market-oriented 
company   ,  5   
 Customer organization structure   , 
 472–3
 Customer-perceived value   ,  267   
 Customer portfolio management 
(CPM)   ,  125–7  
 activity-based costing   ,  138–41   
 in business-to-business context   , 
 147–54
 data mining   ,  143–7   
 lifetime value   ,  141–3   
 market segmentation   ,  127–36   
 sales forecasting   ,  136–8   
 strategically signiﬁ cant customers   , 
 157–8
 strategies   ,  158–9   
 tools   ,  154–7    
 Customer referral scheme (CRS)   ,  245   
 Customer-related data   ,  15   
 Customer-related database   ,  95–6  
 data access and interrogation   , 
 113–14   
 data attributes   ,  108–9   
 data integration   ,  109–11   
 data marts   ,  112–13   
 data mining   ,  114–17   
 data warehousing   ,  111–12   
 database maintenance   ,  107–8   
 database technology and hardware 
platform   ,  102–7   
 development   ,  96–102   
 privacy issues   ,  117–19    
 Customer relationship management, 
deﬁ nition of   ,  4   ,  14–15   
 Customer relationship managers   ,  468   
 Customer relationship value (CRV)   ,  38   
 Customer retention   ,  260   ,  262  
 contexts   ,  280–1   
 customer development   ,  283–4   
 economics   ,  261–2   
 key performance indicators   ,  281   
 positive customer retention 
strategies   ,  263   
 research   ,  277–9   ,  282–3   
 sacking customers   ,  284–7   
 strategies   ,  263–4    
 Customer satisfaction   ,  43   ,  44   
 Customer segmentation   ,  420–1   
 Customer self-service   ,  453   
 Customer service   ,  445–7   

===== PAGE 512 =====
 
Index 489
 Customer service agent   ,  468–9   
 Customer service representative 
(CSR)   ,  97   
 Customer strategy cube   ,  65–6   
 Customer touchpoints   ,  170   
 Customer value:  
 channels   ,  218–19   
 communication   ,  216–18   
 creation   ,  187   
 estimation   ,  231–3   
 people   ,  213   
 physical evidence   ,  214–16   
 processes   ,  210–13   
 products   ,  197–201   
 services   ,  201–9   
 sources   ,  191–3    
 Customers:
 clubs for   ,  271–3   
 delight   ,  264–5   
 dismissals   ,  284–7   
 engagement   ,  277   
 expectations   ,  475   
 key account management   ,  476   
 lifecycle   ,  227–33   ,  252   ,  257   
 prospecting   ,  233–48   
 referrals   ,  261   
 retention   ,  257   ,  258   ,  262   
 signiﬁ cance   ,  157–8    
 Customization:
 customer development   ,  284   
 value from communication   ,  217   
 value for customers   ,  193–7    
 Daewoo   ,  338   
 DASA   ,  330   
 Data access and interrogation   ,  113   
 Data accuracy   ,  108   
 Data attributes   ,  108–9   
 Data enhancement   ,  100–1   
 Data integration   ,  109–11   
 Data marts   ,  112–13   
 Data mining   ,  114–17   ,  143–7   ,  380–1   , 
 428–9
 clustering techniques   ,  144–5   
 customer development   ,  283   
 decision trees   ,  145–7   
 neural networks   ,  147    
 Data protection   ,  117   
 Data security   ,  109   
 Data transformation   ,  112   
 Data warehousing   ,  
111–12   ,  113   
 Database marketing   ,  12   
 Database queries   ,  114   
 Databases:
 customer   ,  97   
 maintenance   ,  107–8   
 technology and hardware platform   , 
 102–7
 Decision trees   ,  145–7   
 De-duplication   ,  106   
 Defection of customers:  
 customer retention   ,  258–60   
 research   ,  282–3    
 Delighting customers   ,  264–5   
 Dell Computer   ,  134   ,  193   ,  264   ,  294   ,  298   , 
 397
 Delta Plastics   ,  298   
 Deming, W. Edward   ,  317   
 Destination outlets   ,  337   
 Development of CRM strategy:  
 business case development   ,  70–1   
 channels   ,  66–7   
 customers/segments   ,  66   
 education commencing   ,  67–8   
 goals and objectives establishment   , 
 69
 market offerings   ,  66   
 people, process and technology 
requirements, identiﬁ cation of   , 
 69–70
 set priorities   ,  68   
 situation analysis   ,  65–6   
 vision development   ,  68    
 Development of customer-related 
database   ,  96–102  
 customer information ﬁ elds   ,  98   
 data enhancement   ,  100–1   
 database functions   ,  97   
 information requirements   ,  98   
 information sources identiﬁ cation   , 
 99–100
 primary data   ,  102   
 secondary data   ,  102    
 Development of customers   ,  357   ,  283–4   
 Dialogue scripting   ,  391   
 Diamond structures, for KAM   ,  480   
 Dick and Basu’s model   ,  45   
 DINA   ,  329   
 Direct mail campaign management   , 
 422
 Discounts   ,  243  
 lifetime value   ,  141–2    
 Discriminant analysis   ,  420   
 Disintermediation   ,  216   
 Dismissal of customers   ,  284–7   
 Disney   ,  339   
 Distribution networks   ,  301–2   

===== PAGE 513 =====
 
490 Index
 Document management   ,  399   
 Door openers   ,  158   
 Dow Chemical   ,  382–3   
 Dun and Bradstreet   ,  321   
 Dunkin ’  Donuts   ,  338   
 DuPont   ,  330   ,  332   
 Dwyer model   ,  34   
 E-auctions   ,  326–7   
 EBM     see   Event-based marketing   
 E-commerce:  
 business-to-business   ,  325–7   
 business-to-consumer   ,  325    
 Economic issues   ,  261–2   
 Economic value to the customer 
(EVC)   ,  189   ,  190   
 Ecosystems   ,  369–72   
 ECR     see   Efﬁ cient consumer response   
 EDI     see   Electronic data interchange   
 Educational programmes   ,  67–8   
 Efﬁ cient consumer response (ECR)   ,  51   
 EGain   ,  423   
 Egg Credit Cards   ,  250   
 Electronic data interchange (EDI)   ,  11   , 
 33   ,  318   ,  326   
 Electronic procurement   ,  324–7  
 business-to-business e-commerce   , 
 325–7
 business-to-consumer e-commerce   , 
 325
 E-mail   ,  326  
 campaign management   ,  423   ,  424   
 integration   ,  386   
 interactivity   ,  217–18   
 prospecting   ,  237–8   ,  247   
 response   ,  391    
 E-mail response management systems 
(ERMS)   ,  453–5   
 EMC remote customer service   ,  471   
 EMM     see   Enterprise marketing 
management
 Emotional buy-in   ,  76   
 Employee:
 portals   ,  358   
 role   ,  351–3   
 satisfaction   ,  356    
 Employee relationship management 
(ERM)
 software applications   ,  357–9    
 Empowerment   ,  354–5   
 Enabling product   ,  198   
 End-user tests   ,  90   
 Enhancement of data   ,  100–1   
 Enron Corporation   ,  234   
 Enterprise CRM suites   ,  369–70   
 Enterprise marketing management 
(EMM)   ,  424   
 E-procurement   ,  326   
 Equity bonds   ,  276   
 Equity theories   ,  209   
 ERM     see   Employee relationship 
management
 ERMS     see   E-mail response 
management systems   
 E-shops   ,  326   
 Ethical concerns   ,  281   
 Ethnographic methods   ,  173–4   
 European Customer Satisfaction 
Index   ,  48   
 European Quality Award   ,  316   
 EVC     see   Economic value to the 
customer
 Event-based marketing   ,  7   ,  251–2   ,  425  
 customer development   ,  283    
 Event management software   ,  399–401   , 
 401
 Execution styles in advertising   ,  240   
 EXEL   ,  314   
 Expectations:
 customer retention   ,  264–5   
 customers   ,  475   
 ownership   ,  281    
 Expectations–disconﬁ rmation model   , 
 44
 Experience mapping   ,  171–2   
 Experimentation   ,  251   
 Extensible markup language     see   XML   
 Extranets   ,  319   
 Family lifecycle (FLC)   ,  130   
 FedEx   ,  332   
 FFP     see   Frequent ﬂ ier programmes   
 Field service   ,  448   
 Fields of information   ,  98   
 Filtrex   ,  434–5   
 Financial bonds   ,  275   
 Fiocca’s CPM model   ,  151–3   
 First Direct   ,  81   
 First time ﬁ x rate (FTFR)   ,  458   
 Five-forces analysis   ,  155–6   
 Fixed costs   ,  320   
 Flag Hotel   ,  338   
 FLC     see   Family lifecycle   
 Flexibility application   ,  180   
 Flowcharting   ,  82   
 Flymo   ,  319–20   
  ‘ Focal ﬁ rm ’    ,  298   
 Ford   ,  317   ,  321   ,  331   

===== PAGE 514 =====
 
Index 491
 Forecasting sales   ,  136–8   
 Forrester   ,  3   ,  369   
 Foundations building, for CRM 
implementation   ,  72  
 buy-in   ,  76–7   
 change management needs 
identiﬁ cation   ,  74–5   
 critical success factors, identiﬁ cation 
of   ,  78–9   
 governance structures 
establishment   ,  72–4   
 organizational culture   ,  75–6   
 project management needs, 
identiﬁ cation of   ,  77–8   
 risk management plan 
development   ,  79–80   
 stakeholders identiﬁ cation   ,  72    
 Franchisees   ,  338–9   
 Francis Buttle’s model   ,  20   
 Free premiums   ,  243   ,  274   
 Free promotional offers   ,  243   
 Freight Traders   ,  408   
 Frequent ﬂ ier programmes (FFP)   ,  267   , 
 270
 Front-ofﬁ ce processes   ,  80   
 FTFR     see   First time ﬁ x rate   
 Functional organization structure   ,  470   
 Functionality, offered by SFA software   , 
 398–406
 Functions of databases   ,  97   
 Gaps, SERVQUAL model   ,  203   ,  204   
 Gartner competency model   ,  20–2   
 Gartner Inc.   ,  419   
 General Electric (GE)   ,  293   ,  314   
 General Foods   ,  294   
 General Motors   ,  314   ,  350  
 product conﬁ guration at   ,  397    
 Genesys   ,  371   
 Geodemographics   ,  130   ,  131   
 Geographic bonds   ,  276   
 Geographic competitors   ,  129   
 Geographical organization structure   , 
 470–1
 Giordano   ,  336   
 GlaxoSmithKline   ,  199   
 Globalization issues   ,  477   
 Goals of CRM   ,  69   ,  469   
 Google Adwords   ,  425   
 Governance structures establishment   , 
 72–4
 GPT Payphone Systems   ,  332   
 Graphical user interface (GUI)   ,  409   
 Green Shield Stamps   ,  267   
 Grönroos model of service quality   ,  202   
 GSK   ,  192   
 GTE   ,  331   
 Guanxi   ,  54   
 Guanzhou Lonkey Industrial 
Company (GLIC)   ,  329   
 Guarantees   ,  206–7   
 GUI     see   Graphical user interface   
 H & R Block   ,  338   
 Hardware:  
 platform   ,  103–4   
 vendors   ,  371    
 Harley Davidson   ,  278   
 Harley Owners Group (HOG)   ,  42   
 Harrah’s Entertainment   ,  419   
 Heineken Ireland   ,  195   
 Helpdesks   ,  448   
 Herbal Enterprise   ,  339   
 Heterogeneous services   ,  192   
 Hewlett-Packard   ,  326   ,  371   
 Hierarchical databases   ,  103   
 High future lifetime value customers   , 
 157
 High performance system   ,  180–1   
 High-tech companies   ,  17   
 High volume customers   ,  157   
 Hilton   ,  337   
 History, customer information   ,  98–9   
 Hoechst-Roussel Pharmaceutical   ,  335   
 Hofmeyr, Jan   ,  231   
 HOG     see   Harley Owners Group   
 Holiday Inn   ,  337   ,  338   
 Horizontal processes   ,  80   
 Hospitalitybex   ,  327   
 Hosted CRM   ,  85–7   
 HPES   ,  436–7   
 Hyperion   ,  378   
 IBM   ,  105   ,  293   ,  302   ,  339   ,  371   
 ICEE Company   ,  449–50   
 ICM     see   Inbound communications 
management
 Identiﬁ cation-based trust   ,  30   
 Identiﬁ cation of market   ,  129   
 IDIC model   ,  19   
 IKEA   ,  169   ,  272   
 IMP     see   Industrial Marketing and 
Purchasing   
 Inbound communications 
management (ICM)   
 Incentive management   ,  401   
 Incident management     see   Case 
management

===== PAGE 515 =====
 
492 Index
 Industrial Marketing and Purchasing 
(IMP)   ,  50  
 activity links   ,  51   
 actor bonds   ,  51   
 resource ties   ,  51    
 Information   ,  389  
 customers   ,  98   
 sources   ,  99–100    
 Information Technology (IT)  
 analytical CRM   ,  377–81   
 architecture of CRM   ,  381   
 automated workﬂ ow   ,  390–1   
 customer and product management   , 
 372–3
 hardware and infrastructure 
vendors   ,  371   
 integration   ,  385–9   
 knowledge management   ,  389–90   
 marketing applications   ,  374   
 misunderstandings   ,  13   
 mobile and wireless solutions   ,  383–4   
 multichannel CRM   ,  381–4   
 network and virtual organizations   , 
 474–5
 origins   ,  365–9   
 partner relationship management   , 
 376–7
 sales applications   ,  374–5   
 service and support applications   , 
 375
 service providers   ,  371–2   
 solutions providers   ,  369–71    
 Infrastructure vendors   ,  371   
 Innovations:
 products   ,  199    
 Inseparable services   ,  192   
 Inspirations   ,  157   
 Installed CRM     see   On-premise CRM   
 Instant messaging   ,  217   
 Instrumental commitment   ,  277   
 Intangible-dominant services   ,  167   ,  192   
 Integration   ,  385–9  
 application   ,  385   
 customer development   ,  284   
 data   ,  109–11   
 e-mail   ,  386   
 telephony   ,  386   
 web   ,  386–7   
 web browsers   ,  388–9    
 Intel   ,  192   ,  293   
 Intellectual buy-in   ,  76   
 Interactive voice response (IVR)   ,  9   , 
 170   ,  178–9   
 Interactivity issues   ,  217–18   
 Internal marketing   ,  353–4   
 International Standard Industrial 
Classiﬁ cation (ISIC)   ,  132   ,  133   ,  134   
 Internet marketing   ,  425   ,  426   
 Internet sales   ,  219 
see also   E-mail   ;  Internet marketing   ; 
 Web technologies   
 Interpersonal contacts   ,  274   ,  475–6   
 Investor and employee relationships, 
managing:
 core owner, attracting   ,  350   
 current investors, educating   ,  349–50   
 employees, role of   ,  351–3   
 empowerment   ,  354–5   
 ERM software applications   ,  357–9   
 internal marketing   ,  353–4   
 investor portal   ,  351   
 owner/investor relationships   ,  345–9   
 privately owned company   ,  351   
 service–proﬁ t chain   ,  355–7    
 Investor portal   ,  351   
 Investors, educating   ,  349–50   
 Invoicing   ,  456   
 ISIC     see   International Standard 
Industrial Classiﬁ cation   
 ISO 9000   ,  316   
 ISO 9001   ,  316   
 ISO 9004   ,  316   
 ISO 19011   ,  316   
 Issue management     see   Case 
management
 IVR     see   Interactive voice 
response   
 Jack Daniels   ,  339   
 Japan Airlines   ,  326   
 JICNARS social grading system   ,  130   
 Jim Beam   ,  418   
 JIT     see   Just-in-time   
 Job backlog   ,  458   
 Job management applications   ,  456–9   
 John Lewis   ,  278   ,  279   
 Joint ventures (JV)   ,  328   
 Justice categories   ,  209   
 Just-in-time (JIT)   ,  51   
 JV     see   Joint ventures   
 Kahlua   ,  339   
 KAM     see   Key account management   
 Kano’s customer delight model   ,  265–7   
 Kanthal   ,  148   
 Keiretsu   ,  338   
 Key account management (KAM)   , 
 476–81

===== PAGE 516 =====
 
Index 493
 Key performance indicators (KPIs)   ,  46  
 customer acquisition   ,  248–9   
 customer retention   ,  281    
 Keyword marketing   ,  425–6   
 Kiwi experience   ,  169   
 Knowledge-based bonds   ,  276   
 Knowledge-based trust   ,  29   
 Knowledge management   ,  389–90   
 Kodak   ,  301   ,  339   
 Korea Telecom   ,  276–7   
 KPIs     see   Key performance indicators   
 Kraft   ,  194   ,  472   
 Laura Ashley   ,  322   
 LBG     see   London Benchmarking Group   
 Leads   ,  233–5  
 assignment   ,  391   
 management   ,  250–1   ,  401–2   ,  405    
 Legacy systems   ,  110   
 Legal bonds   ,  274   ,  275   
 Legislation, privacy issues   ,  117–19   
 Lexus   ,  246   
 LG   ,  192   
 Licensees   ,  339   
 Lifecycle of customers:  
 acquisition   ,  227–31   ,  249–52   
 development   ,  283–4   
 dismissals   ,  284–7   
 prospecting   ,  233–48   
 retention   ,  357   ,  283–4   
 value estimates   ,  231–3    
 Lifestyle analysis   ,  130–1   
 Lifetime value (LTV)   ,  35–40  
 in banking industry   ,  35   
 at Barclays bank   ,  38   
 computing of   ,  37–40   
 customer portfolio management   , 
 141–3
 customer retention   ,  262    
 Log-in navigation   ,  391   
 London Benchmarking Group (LBG)   , 
 332
 Lotteries   ,  243   
 Loyalty management applications   , 
 426–8
 Loyalty of customers   ,  45   
 Loyalty schemes:  
 CRM misunderstanding   ,  14   
 customer retention   ,  267–71    
 LTV     see   Lifetime value   
 Lucozade   ,  199   ,  200   
 M A      see   Marketing automation   
 Maintenance, databases   ,  107–8   
 Management contractors   ,  337   
 Management issues:  
 networks   ,  303–7    
 Managers:
 account managers   ,  466–7   
 campaign managers   ,  467–8   
 customer relationship managers   ,  468   
 market managers   ,  468   
 marketing managers   ,  467    
 Market analyst   ,  467   
 Market managers   ,  468   
 Market positioning   ,  354   
 Market segmentation   ,  353–4   ,  428  
 customer portfolio management   , 
 127–36
 Market structure   ,  472–3   
 Marketing:
 CRM applications   ,  374   
 CRM misunderstanding   ,  13–14   
 information sources   ,  197–8   
 strategic CRM   ,  5    
 marketing, software applications for  
 beneﬁ ts   ,  416–17   
 campaign management   ,  422–4   
 customer segmentation   ,  420–1   
 deﬁ nition   ,  415   
 event-based marketing   ,  425   
 internet marketing   ,  425   
 keyword marketing   ,  425–6   
 loyalty management applications   , 
 426–8
 marketing analytics   ,  428–9   
 marketing optimization   ,  429–30   
 maketing performance 
management   ,  430–1   
 marketing resource management   , 
 431–2
 marketing segmentation   ,  428   
 partner marketing   ,  432   
 product lifecycle management   ,  433   
 search engine optimization   ,  433–4   
 telemarketing   ,  435   
 trigger marketing   ,  435–6   
 web analytics   ,  437–9   
 workﬂ ow engineering   ,  439    
 Marketing analytics   ,  428–9   
 Marketing automation (MA)   ,  7   ,  
416–17
 Marketing costs, reduction of   ,  33   
 Marketing managers   ,  467   
 Marketing mix   ,  354  
 value for customers   ,  192    
 Marketing optimization   ,  429–30  
 customer development   ,  284    

===== PAGE 517 =====
 
494 Index
 Marketing performance management 
(MPM) software   ,  430–1   
 Marketing resource management 
(MRM) applications   ,  431   
 Marks  &  Spencer   ,  115   ,  305   
 Marriott   ,  337   ,  356   
 Mars   ,  331   
 Mass customization   ,  195–7   
 Matrix organization structure   ,  473–4   
 Mazak Corporation   ,  315   
 Mazda cars   ,  331   
 MBNA   ,  252   
 McDonald’s   ,  131   ,  174   ,  190   ,  214   ,  229   , 
 338
 MCI   ,  230   ,  331   
 McKinsey  &  Company   ,  285   ,  323   
 McKinsey /General Electric customer 
portfolio matrix   ,  136   
 Mean time to resolve (MMTR)   ,  458   
 Media selection   ,  240–1   ,  242   
 Member-get-member (MGM) scheme   , 
 35–6   ,  245   
 Mercedes-Benz   ,  217   
 Merchandising   ,  244–5   
 Merge and purge   ,  107   
 Messages in advertising   ,  239–40   
 MGM scheme     see   Member-get-
member scheme   
 Michelle Jank   ,  337   
 Microsoft   ,  201   ,  293   ,  327   ,  368   ,  409   
 Midas   ,  338   
 Midmarket CRM suites   ,  370   ,  371   
 Mining, data   ,  114–17  
 customer development   ,  283    
 Misunderstandings, about CRM   ,  12–14   
 Mitsubishi cars   ,  331   ,  338   
 MMTR     see   Mean time to resolve   
 Mobile and wireless solutions   , 
 383–4
 Mobile synchronized solutions   ,  384   
 Modelled data   ,  101–2   
 Models, of CRM   ,  18–22  
 CRM value chain   ,  20   
 Gartner competency model   ,  20–2   
 IDIC model   ,  19   
 Payne’s ﬁ ve-process model   ,  20   
 QCi model   ,  19    
 Moment of truth (MOT)   ,  170   
 Money, value   ,  188   
 MOT     see   Moment of truth   
 Motorola   ,  317   
 MPM software     see   Marketing 
performance management 
software   
 MRM applications     see   Marketing 
resource management 
applications
 Multichannel CRM   ,  366   ,  381–3   
 Multi-product bonds   ,  276   
 Mystery shopping   ,  171   
 Nader, Ralph   ,  334   
 National Australian Bank   ,  170   
 Natwest Corporate Banking Services   , 
 126
 Nectar loyalty programme   ,  268   ,  427–8   
 Needs speciﬁ cation and partner 
selection:
 call for proposals   ,  88   
 data review and gap analysis   ,  83–4   
 hosted/on-premise CRM   ,  85–7   
 process mapping and reﬁ nement   , 
 80–3
 request for proposals, writing   ,  87–8   
 revised technology needs 
identiﬁ cation   ,  89   
 software applications, importance 
of   ,  84–5    
 Negative retention strategies   ,  263   
 Nescafé   ,  175   ,  331   
 Nestlé   ,  42   ,  278   ,  331   
 Networks:
 databases   ,  103   
 deﬁ nition   ,  294–5   
 in business markets   ,  295–6   
 management   ,  303–7   
 organizations   ,  474–5   
 positions   ,  296–7   
 prospecting   ,  235   
 relationships   ,  302   
 SCOPE model   ,  299   
 supplier relations   ,  300–1    
 Neural networks   ,  147   
 New-to-category customers   ,  228–9   
 New-to-company customers   ,  229–30   
 Nike   ,  336   ,  350   
 Non-competing ﬁ rms, alliances 
between   ,  329  
 diversiﬁ cation   ,  330   
 market expansion   ,  329   
 vertical integration   ,  329–30    
 Non-customers   ,  232   ,  233   
 Nordic model   ,  202   
 Nordic school   ,  52  
 dialogue   ,  52   
 interaction   ,  52   
 value   ,  52–3    
 Normative customer experience   ,  168   

===== PAGE 518 =====
 
Index 495
 North American school   ,  54   
 Not-for-proﬁ t organizations   ,  18   
 NTL referral schemes   ,  246   
 NXT   ,  418   
 Nynex   ,  331   
 Objectives of CRM   ,  69   
 OECD     see   Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development   
 Ofcom   ,  332   
 Offers to customers   ,  249–50   
 Ofﬂ ine CRM     see   On-premise CRM   
 OLAP     see   Online analytical processing   
 OLTP database     see   Online transaction 
processing database   
 On-premise CRM   ,  85–7   
 Online analytical processing (OLAP)   , 
 97   ,  378–80   ,  428   
 Online CRM     see   Hosted CRM   
 Online transaction processing (OLTP) 
database   ,  97   
 Open non-customers   ,  232   
 Operational CRM   ,  6   ,  81   ,  97  
 marketing automation   ,  7   
 at Roche   ,  8   
 sales-force automation   ,  7–8   
 service automation   ,  9    
 Operational excellence   ,  192   
 Opportunity management   ,  402   ,  404   
 Oracle   ,  16   ,  89   ,  104   ,  105   ,  378   ,  448   ,  455   
 Order management   ,  403   
 Order-related costs   ,  139   
 Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development 
(OECD)   ,  117   
 Organizational culture   ,  75–6   
 Organizational issues and CRM   , 
 465–83
 Original Levi Stores   ,  197   
 Outbound communications 
management   ,  457–8   
 Owens and Minor Inc.   ,  113   
 Owner/investor relationships   ,  345–9   
 Ownership expectations   ,  281   
 PAGs     see   Patient advocacy groups   
 Partner marketing solutions   ,  432   
 Partner relationship management 
(PRM)   ,  9   ,  11   ,  327   ,  482  
 CRM applications   ,  376–7    
 Partners   ,  327  
 benchmarking partners   ,  331–2   
 category teams   ,  331   
 competing ﬁ rms   ,  330   
 customer advocacy groups   ,  333–5   
 in value creation   ,  327–9   
 in value delivery   ,  336–9   
 non-competing ﬁ rms, alliances 
between   ,  329   
 regulators   ,  333   
 sponsors   ,  335    
 Partnership: KAM   ,  480   
 Patient advocacy groups (PAGs)   , 
 334–5
 Patronage awards   ,  274   
 Payne’s ﬁ ve-process model   ,  20   
 PDA     see   Personal digital assistant   
 People:
 customization   ,  194–5   
 value for customers   ,  213    
 People, process and technology 
requirements, identiﬁ cation of   , 
 69–70
 Pepsi   ,  330   
 Perceived risk   ,  188   ,  189   
 Performance evaluation   ,  90–1   
 Performance indicators:  
 customer acquisition   ,  248–9   
 customer retention   ,  281    
 Performance issues:  
 network management and CRM   , 
 298–9
 Performance of CRM system   ,  180–1   
 Perishable services   ,  192   
 Persistent cookies   ,  439   
 Person-to-person contacts   ,  475–6   
 Personal digital assistant (PDA)   ,  87  
 versus laptops   ,  88    
 Personalization techniques:  
 value from communication   ,  216–18    
 PESTE analysis   ,  154–5   
 PFIs     see   Priorities for improvement   
 Philips   ,  330   
 Physical evidence:  
 customization   ,  195   
 value for customers   ,  214–16    
 Pipeline management   ,  403–4   
 Pitching   ,  248   
 Planning and implementation   ,  63   , 
 89–90
 foundations building   ,  72–80   
 needs speciﬁ cation and partner 
selection   ,  80–9   
 performance evaluation   ,  90–1   
 strategy development   ,  65–71    
 PLM     see
   Product lifecycle management   
 Populating databases   ,  105–7   
 Portals   ,  214–16   ,  236   

===== PAGE 519 =====
 
496 Index
 Portfolio   ,  125–6  
 purchasing   ,  230    
 Positioning issues:  
 networks   ,  296–7    
 Positive customer experience   ,  168   
 Positive retention strategies   ,  263   
 PR     see   Public relations   
 Premium prices   ,  261–2   
 Premiums   ,  274   
 Primary data   ,  102   
 Primary processes   ,  80   
 Priorities for improvement (PFIs)   ,  265   
 Privacy issues   ,  117–19   
 Privately owned company   ,  351   
 PRIZM customer classiﬁ cation   ,  101   , 
 102
 PRM     see   Partner relationship 
management
 Process:  
 alignment   ,  317–20   
 bonds   ,  274   ,  276   
 customization   ,  194   
 mapping   ,  172   
 value for customers   ,  210–13    
 Procter and Gamble   ,  294   ,  327   ,  329   ,  471   
 Product:  
 association   ,  199   
 competitors   ,  129   
 conﬁ guration   ,  8   ,  397   ,  404   
 development alliances   ,  315   
 encyclopaedias   ,  404   
 integration   ,  248   
 leadership   ,  191   ,  192   
 modiﬁ cation   ,  199   
 organization structure   ,  471–2   
 placement   ,  177   ,  248   
 presence   ,  175–6   
 quality models   ,  265   
 value   ,  197–201   
 visualization software   ,  405    
 Product lifecycle management (PLM)   , 
 433
 Product-oriented businesses   ,  5   
 Product–service bundling   ,  200   
 Production-oriented businesses   ,  5   
 Proﬁ t-adjusted retention rates   ,  259   
 Programme director (PD)   ,  73   ,  77   
 Project:  
 bonds   ,  276   
 Gantt chart   ,  77    
 Project management needs:  
 identiﬁ cation of   ,  77–8    
 Promotions, sales   ,  241   ,  243   ,  273–4   
 Propensity-to-buy   ,  109   
 Propensity-to-switch   ,  134–5   
 Proposal generation software   ,  405   
 Prospecting   ,  233–48   
 Prototype design   ,  90   
 Psychic costs:  
 branding   ,  201   
 value for customers   ,  188–9    
 PTplace.com   ,  326   
 Public relations (PR)   ,  235   
 Purchases:  
 free premiums   ,  274   
 tenure   ,  261    
 Purchasing costs   ,  320   
 Purchasing practices   ,  280–1   
 Qantas Airlines   ,  386   
 QCi model   ,  19   
 Qualitative methods   ,  137   
 Quality of services   ,  202–6   
 Quasi-concentration alliances   ,  330   
 Query-based reporting   ,  378   
 Queuing and routing   ,  458   
 Quotation management software   ,  405   
 RATER variables   ,  203   
 Rational buy-in     see   Intellectual buy-in   
 Raw customer retention rate   ,  259   
 RDBMS     see   Relational database 
management system   
 Real-time:
 CRM   ,  379   ,  380   
 integration   ,  385    
 Rebates   ,  243   ,  274   
 Recency–frequency–monetary (RFM) 
value matrix   ,  115–16   ,  251   
 Recommend-a-friend (RAF) scheme   , 
 245
 Recovery programmes   ,  208–10   
 Referrals   ,  37  
 customers   ,  245   ,  246   ,  248   ,  261   
 networks   ,  235    
 Regression trees   ,  147   ,  420   
 Regulators:
 partners   ,  333    
 Reichheld and Sasser   ,  34   ,  36   
 Relational commitment   ,  278   
 Relational database management 
system (RDBMS)   ,  104–5   
 Relational databases   ,  103–5   
 Relationships   ,  27  
 business performance   ,  43   ,  46   
 change within   ,  28–9   
 commitment   ,  30   
 customer loyalty   ,  43   ,  44–6   

===== PAGE 520 =====
 
Index 497
 customer satisfaction   ,  43   ,  44   
 management theories   ,  50–4   
 networks   ,  302   
 quality   ,  30–1   
 satisfaction–proﬁ t chain   ,  46–9   
 suppliers   ,  300–1   
 trust   ,  29–30   
 with customers   ,  31–40   ,  40–1   
 with suppliers   ,  41–2   ,  42–3    
 Relevant data   ,  109   ,  389   
 Remote customer services   ,  471   
 Renault   ,  329   ,  330   
 Reporting techniques   ,  378   
 Request for proposals (RFP)   ,  87–8   
 Research:  
 into customer commitment   ,  277–9   
 between customer experience and 
CRM   ,  182–3   
 customer retention   ,  282–3   
 into network competence   ,  307   
 of satisfaction–proﬁ t chain   ,  46–9    
 Resource ties   ,  51   
 Response rates   ,  241   
 Retention of customers   ,  260   ,  262  
 contexts   ,  280–1   
 customer development   ,  283–4   
 economics   ,  261–2   
 key performance indicators   ,  281   
 positive customer retention 
strategies   ,  263   
 research   ,  277–9   ,  282–3   
 sacking customers   ,  284–7   
 strategies   ,  263–4    
 Return on investment (ROI)   ,  48   
 Revenue generation through current 
customers   ,  347   
 RFM matrix   ,  45   ,  115–16   ,  251   
 RFM value matrix     see   Recency–
frequency–monetary value matrix   
 RFP     see   Request for proposals   
 RightNow technologies   ,  179   
 Risk management plan, developing   , 
 79–80
 Risks:
 decision trees   ,  145   
 reduction   ,  41–2   
 value for customers   ,  188–9    
 Rochdale Pioneers   ,  267   
 Roche   ,  8   
 ROI     see   Return on investment   
 Roll-out programme   ,  90   
 Rolls Royce   ,  236   ,  330   
 Ronald McDonald   ,  176   
 Rothmans   ,  336   
 Routing   ,  458   
 Royal Bank of Canada (RBC)   ,  349   ,  472   
 Royal Bank of Scotland   ,  13   ,  298   
 S & H Pink Stamps   ,  267   
 S A      see   Service automation   
 SaaS     see   Software-as-a-Service   
 Sacking customers   ,  284–7   
 Safe Harbor principles   ,  119   
 Sales:
 applications   ,  374–5   
 forecasting   ,  136–8   ,  405   
 performance   ,  408–9   
 promotions   ,  241   ,  243   ,  273–4   
 representative   ,  466   
 teams   ,  481–2    
 Sales-adjusted retention rate   ,  259   
 Sales-force automation (SFA)   ,  7–8   , 
 374–5   ,  395  
 adoption   ,  406   
 beneﬁ ts from   ,  407–8   
 deﬁ nition   ,  396   
 hardware and infrastructure 
vendors   ,  397–8   
 sales performance, effects on   ,  408–9   
 service providers   ,  398   
 software functionality   ,  398–406   
 solution providers   ,  396–7    
 Sales-liquidating premium   ,  274   
 Sales-oriented businesses   ,  5   
 Sampling techniques   ,  243   
 Samsung   ,  338   
 SAS airline   ,  205   
 Sass and Bide   ,  336   
 Satisfaction of customers:  
 commitment   ,  278   
 retention   ,  265    
 Satisfaction–proﬁ t chain   ,  43   ,  46–9   
 Scalability system   ,  181–2   
 Scheduling   ,  458   
 Schirf Brewery   ,  176   
 SCOPE model:  
 networks   ,  299–300    
  ‘ Scoring ’    ,  145   
 Scripting   ,  458   
 SCSB     see   Swedish Customer 
Satisfaction Barometer   
 Search costs:  
 branding   ,  201   
 value for customers   ,  188    
 Search engine optimization (SEO)   , 
 425–6   ,  433–4   
 Sears Roebuck   ,  356–7   
 SEAT   ,  314   ,  321   

===== PAGE 521 =====
 
498 Index
 SECOM:
 process innovation   ,  211    
 Secondary data   ,  102   
 Secondary processes   ,  81   
 Security, data   ,  109   
 Segmentation of market:  
 customer portfolio management   , 
 127–36
 Segway® Personal Transporter   ,  11–12   
 Self-liquidating premium   ,  274   
 Self-regulation, privacy issues   ,  117   
 SEO     see   Search engine optimization   
 Sequential patterns   ,  115   
 Service:
 analytics   ,  458–9   
 applications   ,  375   
 attributes   ,  192   
 costs   ,  139   
 enquiry escalation   ,  390   
 guarantees   ,  206–7   
 providers   ,  371–2   
 quality   ,  202–6   
 recovery programmes   ,  208–10   
 value for customers   ,  192    
 Service automation (SA)   ,  9   ,  447–9  
 beneﬁ ts from   ,  449–50   
 customer service   ,  445–7   
 software applications for   ,  450    
 Service level management 
applications   ,  459–60   
 Service–proﬁ t chain   ,  177   ,  355–7   
 Service-level agreements (SLAs)   ,  207–8   
 SERVQUAL model   ,  203   ,  205   
 Session cookies   ,  438–9   
 Set priorities   ,  68   
 7Ps:
 as internal marketing mix   ,  354   ,  355   
 customizing   ,  194    
 Sextant Avionique   ,  330   
 SFA     see   Sales-force automation   
 Share of customer   ,  46   
 Share of wallet (SOW)   ,  46   ,  134   
 Shareable data   ,  108   
 Shared supply alliances   ,  330   
 Shareholder value:  
 CRM competences inﬂ uence in   ,  346   
 growth in   ,  346–7    
 Shell Retail   ,  321   
 Sheraton   ,  337   
 Siemens   ,  371   
 Singapore Airlines   ,  192   
 Situation analysis   ,  65–6   
 Six-Markets Model   ,  53   
 SLAs     see   Service-level agreements   
 SMS messaging   ,  247   
 Social bonds   ,  274–5   
 Social grading systems   ,  130   
 Software applications:  
 for sales-force automation   ,  398–406   
 for service automation   ,  450   
 for software automation   ,  417    
 Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) model   , 
 16   ,  68   ,  70   ,  85   ,  86   
 Sources:  
 value for customers   ,  191–3    
 Southwest Airlines   ,  216   ,  267   
 SOW     see   Share of wallet   
 Spare parts management   ,  460   
 Spatial environments   ,  177   
 Speciality CRM tools   ,  370   ,  371   
 Sponsors   ,  335–6   
 Sprint Nextel   ,  32   
 Spurious loyals   ,  45   
 SSCs     see   Strategically signiﬁ cant 
customers
 Stakeholders identiﬁ cation   ,  72   
 Standard Life   ,  252   
 Standard reporting techniques   ,  378   
 Standard reports   ,  113–14   
 Standardized reports   ,  428   
 STAR Alliance   ,  328–9   
 Strategic CRM   ,  4–6   ,  97  
 at Boise Ofﬁ ce Solutions   ,  6    
 Strategic goals, of CRM   ,  69   ,  469   
 Strategic switching   ,  230–1   
 Strategically signiﬁ cant customers 
(SSCs)   ,  157–8   
 Strategies:
 for customer development   ,  283   
 customer retention   ,  263   
 sacking customers   ,  284–7    
 Stratiﬁ ed contact pattern   ,  476   
 Structural bonds   ,  275–7   
 Supplier relationship management   , 
 313   ,  314  
 electronic procurement   ,  324–7   
 process alignment   ,  317–20   
 product development   ,  315   
 product development alliances   , 
 323–4
 supplier accreditation programmes   , 
 315–16
 trends in   ,  320–3    
 Support applications   ,  375   
 Swedish Customer Satisfaction 
Barometer (SCSB)   ,  48   
 Switching costs   ,  263   
 SWOT analysis   ,  154–5   

===== PAGE 522 =====
 
Index 499
 Synergies   ,  201  
 key account management   ,  481    
 Syngenta   ,  159–60   
 System integration   ,  74   ,  391   
 Tailored value   ,  195   
 TCE     see   Total customer experience   
 TCO     see   Total cost of ownership   
 Tea Rose   ,  337   
 Team selling   ,  481–2   
 Technical Felts   ,  324   
 Technological bonds   ,  276   
 Telemarketing   ,  237   ,  246   ,  435   
 Telephony integration   ,  386   
 Tenure, of customer   ,  32  
 purchases   ,  261    
 Terms of trade costs   ,  139   
 Territory management software   ,  405   
 Tesco   ,  294   ,  298  
 customer portfolio management at   , 
 147
 data mining   ,  143   
 network partners   ,  304–5    
 Text messaging   ,  248   
 Third-party marketplaces   ,  327   
 Thomson   ,  329   ,  330   
 3Com   ,  348   
 3M   ,  81   ,  192   
 Time-series methods   ,  137–8   
 Timely data   ,  109   
 Timely knowledge   ,  390   
 Timeshare Consumers ’  Association   , 
 334
 Tools for CPM   ,  154–7  
 BCG matrix analysis   ,  156–7   
 ﬁ ve-forces analysis   ,  155–6   
 SWOT and PESTE   ,  154–5    
 Toshiba   ,  294   ,  339   
 Total cost of ownership (TCO)   ,  86   ,  87   , 
 189–90
 Total customer experience (TCE)   ,  166   
 Total quality management (TQM)   ,  51   
 Toyota   ,  297   ,  300   ,  301   ,  315   ,  324   
 TPI (total performance Indicators)   ,  357   
 TQM     see   Total quality management   
 Trade costs   ,  139   
 Transactional data   ,  252   
 Transactions:  
 banks   ,  475   
 customer information ﬁ elds   ,  98    
 Transportable data   ,  108   
 Trial offers   ,  243   
 Trigger marketing   ,  435–6   
 Triplet of Relationship Marketing   ,  52   
 Trivariate CPM model   ,  153–4   
 Trouble-ticket screenshot   ,  452   
 Types, of CRM   ,  4   
 Unavailable non-customers   ,  232   
 Uncommitted customers   ,  232–3   
 Unilateral termination   ,  29   
 Unilever   ,  294   ,  327   
 Universal queuing   ,  382   
 UNIX   ,  105   
 Unproﬁ table customers   ,  284–7   
Unsafe at Any Speed    ,  334   
 Up-selling   ,  283   
 UPS (United Parcel Service)   ,  293   
 URL   ,  236   
 US Navy, ERM in   ,  358–9   
 Usability application   ,  179   
 Usage attributes   ,  129   ,  131   
 Validation   ,  106   
 Value:  
 assessment   ,  135–6   
 chain   ,  313   
 channels   ,  218–19   
 customer communication   ,  216–18   
 customers   ,  231–3   
 customization   ,  193–7   
 deﬁ nitions   ,  187   
 ladder   ,  34   
 marketing mix   ,  192   
 people   ,  213   
 physical evidence   ,  214–16   
 processes   ,  210–13   
 products   ,  197–201   
 proposition   ,  191   
 services   ,  201–9   
 sources   ,  191–3   
 staircase   ,  34    
 Value-adding programmes   ,  267–74   
 Values-based bonds   ,  276   
 Values-based commitment   ,  278   
 Variable costs   ,  320   
 Variables:  
 market segmentation   ,  129    
 Vendor managed inventory (VMI)   ,  188   
 Vendor reduction programme   ,  
327   ,  321   
 Vendors:  
 key account management   ,  477    
 Veriﬁ cation issue   ,  106   
 Vertical partnerships   ,  329–30   
 Vertical processes   ,  80   
 Virgin   ,  278   ,  351   
 Virtual organizations   ,  474–5   

===== PAGE 523 =====
 
500 Index
 Visio   ,  8   
 Vision of CRM   ,  68   
 Visual identity   ,  175   
 VMI     see   Vendor managed inventory   
 Vodafone   ,  258   
 Volkswagen   ,  330   
 Volume-based costs   ,  139   
 Volume consumption   ,  131–2   
 Vouchers   ,  273   
 WACC     see   Weighted average cost of 
capital
 Wal-Mart   ,  115   ,  294   
 Walker, Johnnie   ,  176   
 Warehouses, data   ,  111–12   
 Web collaboration, between customer 
and service agent   ,  460   
 Web technologies:  
 analytics   ,  437–9   
 browsers   ,  388–9   
 collaboration   ,  460–1   
 crawlers   ,  434   
 CRM   ,  368   
 integration   ,  386–7   
 loyalty schemes   ,  269   
 portal   ,  214   
 prospecting   ,  235–8    
 Websites and electronic media   ,  177   
 Weighted average cost of capital 
(WACC)   ,  37   ,  345   
 Westinghouse   ,  332   
 Westpac Bank   ,  356   
 Wireless online solutions   ,  384   
 WOM     see   Word-of-mouth   
 Woolworths (Australia)   ,  298   
 Word-of-mouth (WOM)   ,  37   ,  166   ,  244   
 Workﬂ ow engineering software   ,  405–6   , 
 439   ,  461   
 Working capital costs   ,  139   
 World Wide Web (WWW)   ,  217   
 World-Wide Web Consortium (W3C)   , 
 119   
 WWW     see   World Wide Web   
 Xerox   ,  322   ,  331  
 value from processes   ,  210    
 XML (extensible markup language)   , 
 389